Biosensors and Bioelectronics 174 (2021) 112830

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Biosensors and Bioelectronics
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/bios

Diagnosis of COVID-19 for controlling the pandemic: A review of the
state-of-the-art
Nastaran Taleghani, Fariborz Taghipour *
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
SARS-CoV-2
COVID-19
Virus detection
Diagnostics
Pneumonia
Serology tests

To date, health organizations and countries around the world are struggling to completely control the spread of
the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Scientists and researchers are developing tests for the rapid detection
of individuals who may carry the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), while striving
to find a suitable vaccine to immunize healthy individuals. As there are clinically reported cases of asymptomatic
carriers of SARS-CoV-2, fast and accurate diagnosis plays an important role in the control and further prevention
of this disease. Herein, we present recent technologies and techniques that have been implemented for the
diagnosis of COVID-19. We summarize the methods created by different research institutes as well as the
commercial devices and kits developed by companies for the detection of SARS-CoV-2. The description of the
existing methods is followed by highlighting their advantages and challenges. Finally, we propose some prom­
ising techniques that could potentially be applied to the detection of SARS-CoV-2, and tracing the asymptomatic
carriers of COVID-19 rapidly and accurately in the early stages of infection, based on reviewing the research
studies on the detection of similar infectious viruses, especially severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
coronavirus, and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) coronavirus.

1. Introduction
Several viruses of the Coronaviridae family are responsible for in­
fectious diseases among humans and animals (Perlman, 2020). Coro­
naviruses are enveloped, positive-sense single-strand RNA viruses that
spread among humans and usually tend to cause mild respiratory disease
(Kumar, 2020); currently, many human coronaviruses (HCoVs), such as
HCoV-299E, HCoV-NL63, HCoV-HKU1, and HCoV-OC43, are defined as
globally endemic HCoVs and the origin of mild respiratory disease
(WHO, 2020a). Other members of the Coronaviridae family such as the
Betacoronavirus genus, however, have been transmitted from animals to
humans and threaten human health by spreading severe respiratory
diseases such as the zoonotic Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS)
and severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) (Fadaka et al., 2020).
MERS and SARS have been circulated through the human population by
the MERS-coronavirus (MERS-CoV), SARS-coronavirus (SARS-CoV), or
SARS-coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) at different periods, respectively
(Fehr et al., 2017).
SARS emerged as a pandemic in 2002 in Guangdong, China, leading
to more than 8000 confirmed cases and 774 deaths as it spread

throughout the world with an approximately 10% mortality rate (De Wit
et al., 2016; WHO, 2015). Subsequent studies named the Chinese
horseshoe bat as the original reservoir of hosts for SARS-CoV (Lau et al.,
2005; Li et al., 2005) and indicated that the virus had been transmitted
to humans through intermediate hosts being sold in the Chinese wet
market for food (Guan et al., 2003). The pandemic was stopped in 2003
by applying travel restrictions and isolating individuals infected by
SARS-CoV.
The MERS pandemic was highlighted in the summer of 2012 with the
first report of disease in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia (Zaki et al., 2012). This
was followed by the second case reported in the UK which had traveled
from Qatar, and then other cases were reported from healthcare centers
in Jordan (Bermingham et al., 2012; Hijawi et al., 2013). The MERS-CoV
spread to over 27 countries and caused close to 2500 confirmed cases
reported to the WHO with more than 858 deaths, resulting in a high
mortality rate of approximately 34% (WHO, 2020b). Studies suggested
that the first reservoir host of MERS-CoV was dromedary camels
(Camelus dromedaries) since high-titer neutralizing antibodies against
MERS-CoV were present in their sera (Reusken et al., 2013). Moreover, a
sequence of 190 nucleotides from the conserved region of the MERS-CoV

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: fariborz.taghipour@ubc.ca (F. Taghipour).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2020.112830
Received 31 August 2020; Received in revised form 14 November 2020; Accepted 17 November 2020
Available online 27 November 2020
0956-5663/© 2020 The Authors.
Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

article

under

the

CC

BY-NC-ND

license

N. Taleghani and F. Taghipour

Biosensors and Bioelectronics 174 (2021) 112830

genome was amplified from the fecal pellet of a bat in Saudi Arabia
(Memish et al., 2013).
In December 2019, the outbreak of the novel coronavirus was first
reported in Wuhan city, Hubei province, China (C. Huang et al., 2020;
Raeiszadeh and Adeli, 2020; Zhou et al., 2020). The virus was initially
named the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), but then the Interna­
tional Committee of Taxonomy of Viruses named it SARS-CoV-2 (Gor­
balenya et al., 2020). It was suggested (Chan et al., 2020b) that the
original infection was correlated to the Huanan seafood market but
developed to human-to-human transmission. SARS-CoV-2 is responsible
for the coronavirus disease-2019, now called COVID-19, which the WHO
has identified as a public health emergency of pandemic proportions
(WHO, 2020c). COVID-19 is a respiratory disease with symptoms similar
to influenza, manifesting as dry cough, fever, severe headache, and
tiredness. Individuals infected by SARS-CoV-2 show a wide range of
symptoms from mild respiratory disease to severe respiratory disease
with critically ill cases leading to organ function damage, such as cardiac
injury, acute kidney injury, liver dysfunction, and acute respiratory
distress syndrome, which can result in a long-term decrease in lung
function and arrhythmia; eventually, some critical cases may lead to
death (Gordon et al., 2020; Kumar, 2020). The severe conditions and
death have usually been specific to older patients or patients with a
weak immune system such as specific heart conditions. Due to interna­
tional travel, the SARS-CoV-2 spread rapidly around the world leading
to more than 200 countries struggling with COVID-19, and since the
onset, the number of infected individuals and deaths has risen
constantly; in fact, as of November 2020, more than 50 million
laboratory-confirmed cases have been reported with more than 1 million
fatalities since its emergence (Worldometer, 2020).
The phylogenetic analysis illustrates that both SARS-CoV and SARSCoV-2 are from lineage B of the Betacoronavirus genus, while MERS-CoV
belongs to the lineage C of the Betacoronavirus genus (Chan et al.,
2020a; Letko et al., 2020; Mohd et al., 2016), which explains 79.6% of
the sequence identity and the multiple similarities of SARS-CoV and
SARS-CoV-2 (Kumar, 2020). As the spike (S) protein structure and re­
ceptor binding domain of SARS-CoV-2 is very similar to that of
SARS-CoV (Andersen et al., 2020; Li, 2016; Lu et al., 2020), many hy­
potheses have arisen indicating that they probably use the same host cell
receptor. Several studies (e.g., Imai et al., 2005; Kuba et al., 2005) have
highlighted angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) as the functional
receptor of SARS-CoV in vitro and in vivo. Supporting the aforementioned
hypothesis, a recent study (Monteil et al., 2020) indicated that both
SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 use the same ACE2 receptor to infect
humans.
Health organizations and countries around the world are still
struggling to control the spread of COVID-19 by developing tests for the
rapid detection of individuals who may carry the SARS-CoV-2, finding
the suitable treatment for the infected ones, and developing a vaccine to
immunize healthy people. However, the binding affinity of SARS-CoV-2
toward the ACE2 receptor is higher than that of SARS-CoV (Shang et al.,
2020). Therefore, SARS-CoV-2 spreads more efficiently than SARS-CoV,
and this higher rate increases its pandemic potential and makes it harder
to contain (Gordon et al., 2020). Additionally, there are clinically re­
ported cases of individuals carrying the SARS-CoV-2 virus without
evidencing any symptoms, meaning that they do not exhibit any sign of
fever or cough or have very slight symptoms which are not strong
enough to cause these carriers to report their condition to health orga­
nizations (Mao et al., 2020). Having many unsuspected asymptomatic
COVID-19 carriers in communication with other people increases the
risk of infecting healthy people and enables the virus to spread much
more. This situation may lead to problems such as the overloading of
clinics and hospitals (Mao et al., 2020). The crowds of patients in hos­
pitals waiting to be treated can make the situation even worse by
increasing the possibility of cross-infection of patients with other
infected people. All the aforementioned challenges, without any spe­
cifically approved vaccine for COVID-19, make tracing the

asymptomatic carriers of COVID-19 and detecting all infected in­
dividuals rapidly and accurately critical for the control and further
prevention of this disease. We believe the key to tracing all infected
individuals is the development of sensitive and specific point-of-care
(POC) devices for mass screening and testing.
COVID-19 diagnosis methods have been reviewed in some recent
articles. For instance, laboratory methods focused on different types of
samples and issues related to sample collection, such as which sample to
collect and the right time to collect each sample in relation to the course
of the disease, were addressed (Mathuria et al., 2020). Performance
evaluation of the laboratory methods was also conducted to provide
more information regarding the development of algorithmic approaches
for treatment and healthcare strategies (La Marca et al., 2020). The
biomarkers for COVID-19 diagnosis were compared and analyzed along
with the right time for collecting each sample type (Cui and Zhou,
2020). Moreover, current COVID-19 diagnostic challenges, including
but not limited to the lack of a universal standard and the difficulty in
mass screening and testing, were discussed (Xu et al., 2020). The pos­
sibility of pets and farm animals’ infection was likewise studied on the
basis of the sequence analysis of the ACE2 receptor between humans and
animals, indicating that SARS-CoV-2 might infect other species from
humans and vice versa (Li and Ren, 2020).
Herein, we present a comprehensive review of the scientific detec­
tion methods reported in the literature, with special attention to the
operation mechanism as well as the techniques and devices commer­
cially available and currently being implemented for COVID-19 diag­
nosis. Viruses from the same genus have similar genetic content, such as
the genes responsible for infection of the host cell. Subsequently, these
viruses have antigens and binding domains with similar structures and
analogous, related functions in their host. Considering this fact, we then
review the research conducted on the detection of infectious viruses,
especially SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, to propose additional potentially
effective methods for fast and sensitive POC diagnosing of COVID-19.
The objective is to identify asymptomatic patients and control the
spread of COVID-19 and further pandemic outbreaks.
2. Developed methods for the COVID-19 diagnosis
The diagnosis of a specific disease such as COVID-19 can be con­
ducted based on different biomarkers correlated to the microorganism
responsible for the disease. The target biomarker can be the genetic
content of the microorganism, leading to the development of molecular
tests requiring sample collection from the infected area and detecting
the target gene. Molecules involved in the immune response of the body
against the microorganism’s antigens are another set of biomarkers
utilized for diagnostics. This set of biomarkers consists mainly of anti­
bodies present in the blood to fight against the microorganism’s anti­
gens, and serology tests are developed to detect them. Another method
of diagnosis is to take a closer look at the organs whose functions are
affected by the microorganism and detect the changes in the concen­
tration of their biomarkers for the diagnosis. For the COVID-19 case,
abnormalities in the chest, inflammatory markers, and markers related
to kidney and liver functions, such as creatinine and cystatin C, are
utilized for diagnosis.
The conventional detection methods for SARS-CoV-2, such as those
used for other forms of viral infectious pneumonia, are generally based
on molecular tests, serology tests, and computed tomography (CT).
Molecular tests target the SARS-CoV-2 genome specifically and work on
the basis of viral nucleic acid amplification to achieve a concentration
high enough to be detectable by the currently existing developed
detection devices. Serology tests target the protein antigens and anti­
bodies produced in response to the presence of SARS-CoV-2. CT can
identify the possible abnormalities caused by the viral infection in the
chest and the abnormal features that could lead to COVID-19 or other
pneumonia diagnoses. Other detection technologies developed for the
identification of SARS-CoV-2 are based on the detection of different
2

N. Taleghani and F. Taghipour

Biosensors and Bioelectronics 174 (2021) 112830

biomarkers in biofluids, plasmonic sensing, and field effect transistor
(FET)-based sensing. Fig. 1 demonstrates the core technologies of SARSCoV-2 detection and their principle of operation. The following is a
detailed description of each technology and the related studies that have
been performed to date.

these three molecular methods. Many researchers and medical
manufacturing companies have developed COVID-19 molecular detec­
tion kits to identify the presence of SARS-CoV-2 in the respiratory tract
of patients. It is noteworthy that, as the RNA extraction should be done
in a biosafety cabinet in a biosafety level-2 facility, all of the developed
detection kits are being used by authorized laboratories, not the patients
themselves. Some of the currently existing molecular detection kits for
SARS-CoV-2 available from various research institutes and companies
are summarized in Table 1.

2.1. Molecular tests (nucleic acid amplification)
The proposed method for the routine confirmation of infected cases
and detection of SARS-CoV-2 by WHO (WHO, 2020a) and the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) (FDA, 2020) is reverse transcription poly­
merase chain reaction (RT-PCR), which is one of the nucleic acid
amplification tests (NAATs). NAATs are molecular tests that target
specific nucleic acid sequences of the pathogen to identify its presence in
the obtained sample from the suspected patient. The SARS-CoV-2 NAAT
targets specific viral genes, such as the nucleocapsid (N) gene, the en­
velope (E) gene, the S gene, and RNA dependent RNA polymerase
(RdRP) gene, from the respiratory tract of the suspected patient and then
amplifies the virus RNA using molecular techniques including real-time
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR). Fig. 2 il­
lustrates the SARS-CoV-2 structure and its proteins.
Other molecular techniques have been developed for the detection of
SARS-CoV-2, including loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP),
reverse transcription LAMP (RT-LAMP), real-time RT-LAMP (rRTLAMP), and the specific high-sensitivity enzymatic reporter unlocking
(SHERLOCK) assay. Fig. 3 illustrates the main operating principle of

2.1.1. RT-PCR
RT-PCR is a gene amplification process consisting of different steps
with specific environmental conditions. In general, RT-PCR is the pro­
cess of reverse transcription of the RNA, in this case, SARS-CoV-2 RNA,
into a complementary DNA (cDNA) and then designing primers and a
fluorophore-quencher probe to amplify specific parts of the cDNA and
obtaining quantified results about the presence of SARS-CoV-2 (Freeman
et al., 1999; Kageyama et al., 2003). This process first begins with the
extraction of RNA from the upper or lower respiratory tract. It is rec­
ommended to take samples from the upper respiratory tract, such as
nasopharyngeal swabs, oropharyngeal swabs, nasopharyngeal washes,
and nasal aspirates. However, in patients manifesting cough, the spec­
imen is usually taken from the lower respiratory tract, including sputum,
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid, and tracheal aspirates (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2020a). The extracted RNA from
samples is then added into a mixture containing all necessary buffers,

Fig. 1. Illustration of the main technologies for the diagnosis of the suspected COVID-19 cases. A) The principle of the molecular test is the transcription of viral RNA
into DNA and then targeting the DNA for amplification and replication to the point that it can be detected by the detectors. B) The serological test works based on the
principle of the interaction of immobilized antibody and the antibody present in the sample, either on a lateral flow platform or ELISA. C) Chest CT is performed in
healthcare facilities with special equipment. D) Other methods such as FET-based sensing and plasmonic sensing have been developed but have not yet been applied
in healthcare facilities (Qiu et al., 2020; Seo et al., 2020).
3

N. Taleghani and F. Taghipour

Biosensors and Bioelectronics 174 (2021) 112830

Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of a 2D illustration of the SARS-CoV-2 structural proteins and genome.

Fig. 3. Illustration of the molecular methods for the detection of SARS-CoV-2. A) The principle of target viral RNA detection based on reverse transcription of target
RNA into DNA and the amplification. B) Illustration of the LAMP technology with the final accumulated DNA structures; this method is explained in detail in Fig. 4.
C) A schematic of the SHERLOCK assay started with the amplification of target RNA and its interaction with Cas13a, which is followed by the cleavage of the probe
and generation of fluorescent signal.

enzymes, primers, probes, and precursors, including nuclease-free
water, reverse transcriptase, polymerase, additives, forward and
reverse primers, a fluorophore-quencher probe, and nucleotides (CDC,
2020b). In rRT-PCT, the mixture is put in a thermocycler, and the series
of temperatures and time periods are set to run the cycles. In each cycle,
the cleavage of the fluorophore-quencher probe results in a fluorescent
signal which is detected by the thermocycler to give information on the
process in a real-time manner.
As the U.S. CDC establishes the cycling conditions for rRT-PCR (CDC,
2020b), two of the main variables left are the sequence targeted for
amplification and designing the primers and probe. There are three
conserved regions of the coronavirus/SARS genome: the RdRP gene
located in the open reading frame ORF1ab, the N gene, and the E gene.
Targeting the RdRP and E gene provides lower detection limits and,
hence, higher sensitivity compared with the N gene (Udugama et al.,

2020), and that is why most of the developed kits for SARS-CoV-2
detection have targeted the RdRP and E gene. Another variable of the
final results of the detection test kits is the time that the samples have
been taken, as the viral load varies on different days after the infection
(Pan et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020). Therefore, a negative result would
not conclude the absence of disease and could be the result of a low viral
load in the system sample at the time it was taken or from possible
problems that could have occurred in sampling.
At the beginning of the outbreak of COVID-19, the laboratories
testing the COVID-19 by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) would pro­
vide the results in a couple of days. As the number of infected individuals
was rising rapidly, the emergence of detection kits that could provide
faster results became urgent. Therefore, many researchers and com­
panies developed molecular kits that returned results in a shorter period
of time. The following is a brief review of the commercially available RT4

N. Taleghani and F. Taghipour

Biosensors and Bioelectronics 174 (2021) 112830

Fig. 4. Illustration of LAMP technology to amplify the target double-strand DNA. A) Based on the sequence of the target DNA, four or six primers are designed for the
amplification process. B) First, the two strands detach, and the forward inner primer attaches to initiate the DNA synthesis. C) This is followed by the second
separation of strands, formation of a self-hybridizing loop in one of the strands, and then attachment of the forward outer primer to the other strand and initiation of
DNA synthesis. D) The same process happens with the backward primers, thus leading to the formation of a LAMP dumbbell structure. E) As the dumbbell structure
has more initiation sites for DNA synthesis, the concatemers are formed which have even more sites for the DNA synthesis initiation. F) In the end, multiple doublestrand DNA structures are accumulated which are enough to be detected by various types of detectors.

PCR detection kits with their respective result delivery times.
Viractor Erofins launched their SARS-CoV-2 rRT-PCR test on March
13, 2020; it provides results within 12–18 h. Their rRT-PCR test can be
tested mainly on an upper respiratory specimen with oropharyngeal
swabs, nasopharyngeal swabs, nasopharyngeal wash, nasal swab, and
nasal wash, but also on lower respiratory specimens with a BAL swab;
suspected patients are offered consultation regarding the appropriate
specimen type for testing (Viracor Eurofins, 2020).
BGI Genomics Co. Ltd. (Shenzhen, China) was authorized for its RealTime Fluorescent RT-PCR Kit for COVID-19 diagnosis on April 24, 2020.
The kit consists of an automated sample preparation system and an
additional RNA extraction kit along with the PCR system that can pro­
vide established results of 192 specimens in about 4 h. The automated
sample preparation system can be employed for different types of upper
and lower respiratory sample collection with oropharyngeal swabs,
nasopharyngeal swabs, nasal washes, nasal aspirates, and BAL fluid. The
cross-reactivity of the this kit for SARS-CoV-2 has been investigated for
more than 50 pathogens, and no cross-reactivity was found in the tested
pathogens (BGI, 2020).
Bosch developed a fully-automated rapid test for the detection of
SARS-CoV-2 with 95% accuracy that meets WHO quality standards. The
developed detection test is based on multiplex PCR and micro-array
detection for the COVID-19 diagnosis. Their device consists of two

parts: a cartridge containing all the required reagents and the Vivalytic
analyzer (Bosch Healthcare Solutions GmbH, Waiblingen, Germany).
This device, which seems to be the first fully automated COVID-19 test,
can be directly used by medical institutions to detect the virus and report
results electronically in less than two and a half hours. The device is
reported to have the capacity of testing a single specimen not only for
COVID-19, but also for nine other pathogens such as influenza A and B,
simultaneously (Bosch Global, 2020).
Cepheid (Sunnyvale, CA, USA) reported the development of one of
the most rapid molecular tests for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 on March
21, 2020. Cepheid’s rapid molecular detection kit for SARS-CoV-2 takes
less than 1 min of hand operation for sample preparation and return the
results within 30 min. This test provides POC results with the same level
of performance seen in reference labs (Capheid, 2020).
The aforementioned developed RCR tests have differences among
them, but they all share the RNA extraction process which is necessary to
perform before the PCR steps. This RNA extraction step is quite complex
and makes the overall procedure complicated. In addition, one of the
major bottlenecks in PCR tests for COVID-19 diagnosis is the RNA
extraction as there is a restricted number of RNA extraction reagents and
kits, and the extraction procedure is not completely efficient. This
challenge has been addressed (Joung et al., 2020) by developing a
protocol of one-step column-free RNA preparation that take only 5 min
5

N. Taleghani and F. Taghipour

Biosensors and Bioelectronics 174 (2021) 112830

Table 1
Developed molecular detection kits of SARS-CoV-2 from different manufacturers and researchers.
Technology

Manufacturer

Delivery time of
results

Comment

References

RT-PCR

Viractor Erofins

12–18 h

RT-PCR

BGI

(Viracor Eurofins,
2020)
BGI (2020)

RT-PCR

Bosch

192 samples
around 4 h
2.5 h

RT-PCR
RT-PCR

Cepheid
Mesa Biotech

30 min
30 min

RT-LAMP

Abbott Laboratories

5–13 min

Taking samples from the upper and lower respiratory tract, consulting patients about
the appropriate type of sample
Taking samples from the upper and lower respiratory tract, automated sample
preparation, no cross-reactivity with more than 50 tested pathogens
Fully automated, POC, testing samples for COVID-19 and 9 other pathogens of the
respiratory tract
Less than 1 min of hand operation, POC
Qualitative with a visual read of results, POC, using throat and nasal swabs, targeting N
protein
Fast delivery of the positive results in 5 min, small size that can be used in clinics

RT-LAMP

Creative Biolabs

1–2 h

A cost-effective system, no need for highly trained staff

RT-LAMP

Sanya Peoples Hospital,
Sanya, Hainan
Seasun Biomaterials

1h

Howard Hughes Medical
Institute

1h

Higher sensitivity compared with established RT-LAMP, amplification in one step and
single tube
Qualitative, using human RNase P as internal control, targeting ORF1ab for detection,
detection based on upper and lower respiratory specimens
Highly specific and sensitive, low cost of materials

RT-LAMP
SHERLOCK

–

and does not require RNA extraction. This protocol has been tested on a
limited number of nasopharyngeal swab samples and demonstrated no
negative impact on the sensitivity of the RT-PCR test. Therefore, the
developed protocol can be a suitable candidate for the existing RNA
extraction step that could then address the limited availability of RNA
extraction supplies.

Bosch Global (2020)
Capheid (2020)
Mesa Biotechnology
(2020)
Abbott Laboratories
(2020a)
(Creative Biolabs,
2020)
Zhu et al. (2020)
(Biomaterials, 2020)
Zhang et al. (2020)

diagnosis of COVID-19 by a scientific team from Creative Biolabs
(Shirley, NY, USA) (Creative Biolabs, 2020). The team has designed the
primers and probes, the stability studies, and the test optimization to
develop the molecular-based technologies with high sensitivity for the
detection of SARS-CoV-2. Creative Biolabs’ RT-LAMP assay provides the
results in 1–2 h with no need for highly trained medical staff. The
developed RT-LAMP test by this team determines the SARS-CoV-2 sus­
ceptible populations in one step and provides data for appropriate
decision-making regarding the control of COVID-19 (Creative Biolabs,
2020).
Abbott Laboratories’ (Abbott Park, IL, USA) new Abbott ID NOW
COVID-19 test was authorized by the FDA for the detection of COVID19 by authorized laboratories and patient care settings on March 27,
2020. The Abbott ID NOW COVID-19 test is the fastest molecular test to
detect SARS-CoV-2 and will return the positive results within 5 min and
negative results in 13 min. Operating based on the same concept as those
of other molecular tests, it detects a specific part of SARS-CoV-2 nucleic
acid and amplifies that isothermally until there is enough content for the
detection. The device has a small footprint, making it useable in urgent
care clinics as well as hospitals (Abbott Laboratories, 2020a).
An RT-LAMP coupled with a nanoparticles-based biosensor (NBS)
assay has been developed for the fast and accurate detection of SARSCoV-2 in one step to improve the sensitivity compared with the estab­
lished RT-LAMP assays (Zhu et al., 2020). The research team amplified
genes isothermally and used a heating block to maintain a constant
temperature, after which, using the designed primers, the SARS-CoV-2
genes were amplified in one step in a single tube, and the results were
simultaneously analyzed by the NBS. Interestingly, the assay was tested
among clinically confirmed COVID-19 patients and clinical samples
collected from non-COVID-19 patients and achieved 100% sensitivity
and specificity, respectively. Their system can interpret the results
within 1 h, making it a promising candidate for the diagnosis of
COVID-19 in countries with limited medical resources and staff.

2.1.2. RT-LAMP
Some molecular-based technologies operate the nucleic acid ampli­
fication isothermally and with simpler settings, unlike PCR-based tech­
nologies which require a thermocycler, as they consist of different steps
operating at different temperatures. These technologies include but are
not limited to LAMP, RT-LAMP, and rRT-LAMP. In brief, the DNA po­
lymerase along with multiple primers, six or four as inner and outer
primers, is used to amplify the target sequence (Lee et al., 2011). The
RT-LAMP first stage is the reverse transcription to achieve a DNA
structure and is followed by the second stage which is the imple­
mentation of the LAMP technique to amplify the target DNA. During the
first stage, RNA is reverse transcripted into cDNA. The second stage
(Fig. 4), the nucleic acid amplification, is based on auto cycling strand
displacement DNA synthesis by inner and outer primers leading to a
dumbbell-like DNA structure. In the amplification process, the
dumbbell-like structure with many sites for DNA synthesis initiation
transfers into long concatemers, each with even more sites for DNA
synthesis initiation. This final stage results in the accumulation of
different DNA structures, having the same target DNA sequence, that can
be detected in a real-time manner based on turbidity or after amplifi­
cation by using agarose gel analysis (Parida et al., 2004). RT-LAMP is a
simple and practical technique as the results are analyzed by the change
of color, fluorescence, or turbidity in the PCR tubes (Mori et al., 2001).
As RT-LAMP uses more primers compared with RT-PCR, it has higher
specificity (Notomi et al., 2000).
Based on the gained knowledge in the detection of other coronavi­
ruses, other techniques such as RT-LAMP and rRT-LAMP are considered
to be promising candidates for the COVID-19 diagnosis. RT-LAMP is a
rapid and precise detection method for SARS-CoV-2, and it has been
proven to be a suitable method for large-scale screening of the virus. The
advantages of using RT-LAMP for SARS-CoV-2 detection are less back­
ground signal, simple operation, more specific detection compared with
PCR-based methods, and no requirement for a thermocycler (Notomi
et al., 2000). On the other hand, RT-LAMP presents challenges in
designing primers and optimizing the time and temperature to gain the
best limit of detection.
Several molecular techniques have been developed for early

2.1.3. SHERLOCK
In addition to the aforementioned technologies, other molecular
detection techniques can be implemented for SARS-CoV-2 detection,
most notably the SHERLOCK assay. The SHERLOCK assay is based on
employing nucleic acid amplification along with clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated
system (Cas) enzymology to detect the target nucleic acid specifically.
CRISPR-Cas systems combine the guide RNA with Cas nuclease. Guide
RNA identifies the target sequence and has two main components: the
CRISPR RNA that is complementary to the target RNA and the TRACR
6

N. Taleghani and F. Taghipour

Biosensors and Bioelectronics 174 (2021) 112830

RNA that acts as a scaffold for Cas nuclease. CRISPR-Cas technology
benefits from programmable endonuclease activity and can therefore be
implemented for the specific and highly sensitive detection of nucleic
acids. In brief, CRISPR-Cas technologies utilize Cas13 or Cas12 nuclease,
which is programmed by CRISPR RNA. Upon the binding of CRISPR RNA
to the target sequence, the nonspecific endonuclease activity of Cas13 or
Cas12 starts, leading to the cleavage of nearby RNAs such as the reporter
RNA, generating a signal, and providing a platform for specific and
sensitive RNA detection (Gootenberg et al., 2017; Kellner et al., 2019).
The SHERLOCK detection technique uses recombinase polymerase
amplification to amplify the target RNA isothermally. The amplification
is followed by adding a guide RNA to attach the target sequence, a short
nucleotide fluorophore-quencher probe, and Cas13a ribonuclease.
Cas13a ribonuclease cleaves its target RNA, and after cleavage, it reverts
to an active state where Cas13a binds and cleaves additional RNA
non-specifically; this behavior is referred to as collateral cleavage. In the
presence of the target gene, the cleavage of the target RNA occurs, which
is then followed by the non-specific activity of Cas13a to cleave the
fluorophore-quencher probe to generate a fluorescent signal (Gro­
nowski, 2018). SHERLOCK can be performed in a one- or two-step re­
action based on the importance of result delivery time and sensitivity.
The one-step reaction can take place within 15–30 min with a femto­
molar to attomolar range of sensitivity, while the two-step reaction can
take 30–60 min to provide results with a zeptomolar range of sensitivity
(Kellner et al., 2019).
SHERLOCK is a highly specific and sensitive method for detection as
Cas13 is not activated in the case of two or more mismatches in the
target RNA, and it can easily discriminate between SARS-CoV-2 and
other similar viruses. Another advantage is the low cost of materials that
can be freeze-dried for transportation. The challenges are the design of
the reaction mixture and nucleotides as there are no commercially
available predesigned assays for SHERLOCK. Another disadvantage is
the multi-step nucleic acid amplification. SHERLOCK has been used in
the past for the detection of the Zika virus (Gootenberg et al., 2017). A
graphene-based FET and CRISPR technology were combined to develop
a label-free platform called CRISPR-Chip for the fast and highly sensitive
detection of blue fluorescent protein gene, the target nucleic acid, within
intact genomic content (Hajian et al., 2019). Graphene was functional­
ized with a catalytic CRISPR complex that interacts with the target gene
to modulate the electrical characteristics of the biosensor and produce
an electrical signal. The developed biosensor detected the target gene
with a 1.7 fM sensitivity within 15 min. Recently, a protocol has been
developed for the SHERLOCK detection of SARS-CoV-2 (Zhang et al.,
2020). The developed protocol returns the results within 1 h and can be
considered for rapid COVID-19 diagnosis.

that attach to the pathogens to inactivate them and help in the further
elimination of them. Therefore, a method for diagnosis of COVID-19 in
suspected cases is a serology test where the presence and the level of
antibodies in the blood is measured. Unlike the molecular tests that
detect the SARS-CoV-2 genome, serology tests detect the immune
response of the body in cases where the individual is carrying the SARCoV-2, and the immune response has been developed. As the response of
the immune system to the virus takes time to be developed, the serology
tests offer a wider time frame for diagnosis of COVID-19.
Usually, two types of antibodies are measured in a serology test:
immunoglobulin M (IgM) and immunoglobulin G (IgG). The presence
and level of immunoglobulin A (IgA) are also studied and measured in
serological assessments. IgA is mainly present in mucous membranes
such as the respiratory and digestive tracts. It can also be found in saliva,
tears, blood, the genitourinary tract, and the nasopharynx as well (Roda
et al., 2021). IgM is a general antibody developed as an initial immune
response of the body to many pathogens; IgM is a sign of recent or active
infection. As our body is trying to develop more specific immune re­
sponses to an infection such as COVID-19, the IgG antibody against
infection is developed. IgA can promote antibody-mediated cellar
mechanisms that lead to further control and inhibition of microorganism
infections. Fig. 5 demonstrates the approximate level of IgM and IgG
antibodies at different weeks after infection. As IgG is more specific to
the pathogens, most serology tests measure the amount of IgG antibody.
However, the development of the IgG antibody may take more time,
even up to three weeks (CDC, 2020a). All the aforementioned infor­
mation about IgM, IgG, and IgA antibodies leads to the conclusion that
serology tests are more practical in the surveillance of COVID-19 and
can provide useful information about individuals fighting against the
COVID-19 or the ones who have survived from it. On the other hand, one
of the disadvantages of the serology tests is the possibility of inaccuracy,
as there is a potential of cross-reactivity between antibodies generated
against SARS-CoV-2 and those generated against other coronaviruses. A
related study (Lv et al., 2020) illustrated the cross-reactivity between
antibodies against the S protein of SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV, respec­
tively. To overcome this limitation, several techniques can be imple­
mented to improve the specificity of serology tests. For instance,
antibodies targeting other epitopes of SARS-CoV-2 can be utilized to
decrease the possibility of cross-reactivity. Further, a dual selection
strategy can be utilized to improve the accuracy of serology tests (Gar­
cia-Rodriguez et al., 2007). Moreover, some sample preparation steps
can be added prior to the serology test. Those include adding some
blocking reagents to inhibit further interaction of SARS-CoV with anti­
body or making the environment competitive for SARS-CoV-2 and
SARS-CoV to favor higher affinity toward SARS-CoV-2, making it more
appealing for its interaction with the antibody. Most importantly,
various artificial intelligence (AI) technologies including machine
learning and deep learning can be implemented to develop antibodies
with higher affinities toward SARS-CoV-2 compared to SARS-CoV
(Klompus et al., 2020; Tianjin University, 2020).
Many researchers have developed serology tests for the detection of
SARS-CoV-2. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) devel­
oped to detect IgM and IgG from the serum of COVID-19 patients (Zhang
et al., 2020), determined that the concentration of IgM and IgG anti­
bodies increases in the first week of infection. Companies have also put
effort into developing serology tests to control further spread of the
virus. The basic principle of the anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibody detection in
the developed serology tests is summarized in Fig. 6.
The following is a brief description of the commercially available
serology tests for the COVID-19 diagnosis. Some of the main currently
developed serology detection kits of SARS-CoV-2 from different research
institutes and companies are summarized in Table 2. Descriptions of
these SARS-CoV-2 detection devices, for both the molecular and
serology methods, are summarized in Table 3.
Abbott Laboratories has launched two medical tests, Alinity i SARSCoV-2 IgG and Architect SARS-CoV-2 IgG, for the lab-based serological

2.2. Immunoassays
Immunoassays are biochemical tests developed to detect the pres­
ence and concentration of a specific biomarker using antigens or anti­
bodies. The mechanism of detection is based on a competitive affinity
reaction between the target biomarker (antigen or antibody) and other
molecules in a sample for limited binding sites provided by the immo­
bilized capture reagent (antibody or antigen) (Kellner et al., 1998).
Immunoassays developed for COVID-19 diagnosis either measure the
presence of the SARS-CoV-2 antigen, called antigen tests, or the
anti-SARS-coV-2 antibody produced to fight against SARS-CoV-2, called
serology tests. Many researchers and medical device manufacturing
companies have developed and studied COVID-19 immunoassays to
identify the presence of corresponding antigens or antibodies in
COVID-19 patients.
2.2.1. Serology tests
When our body is infected with a pathogen such as SARS-CoV-2, an
overall immune system is triggered to fight against that pathogen. One
of these mechanisms of the overall immune system builds antibodies
7

N. Taleghani and F. Taghipour

Biosensors and Bioelectronics 174 (2021) 112830

Fig. 5. The approximate level of IgM and IgG antibodies generated against SARS-CoV-2 at different weeks after the infection. Based on conducted studies, there
would be one or two weeks with no symptoms and no antibodies in the blood sample, that is, during the incubation time. Then, IgM antibodies are produced as an
initial immune response that is followed by the formation of IgG antibodies to develop a more specific immune response.

Fig. 6. Schematic illustration of the serology tests for the COVID-19 diagnosis. A) The main detection principle of anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibody on a lateral flow assay is
that, after adding the sample, the blood moves through the test strip, and antibodies present in the sample reach the test line and control line, leading to a change of
color in those lines; this method is explained in detail in Fig. 9. B) An illustration of the ELISA plate and the composition of each well. After adding the sample, the
anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies attach to the immobilized antibody, after which the labeled antibodies are added to get a signal. C) An illustration of chemiluminescent
microparticle immunoassay (CMIA); specific antibodies are immobilized on each particle to interact with the target antibody after the sample is added, and then
labeled antibodies are used to provide a signal indicating the presence of target antibody. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader
is referred to the Web version of this article.)
8

N. Taleghani and F. Taghipour

Biosensors and Bioelectronics 174 (2021) 112830

detection of COVID-19. The tests perform a high throughput chemilu­
minescent microparticle immunoassay (CMIA) that measures the
amount of IgG antibody in human serum or plasma generated against
SARS-CoV-2 and target the N protein. Architect SARS-CoV-2 IgG, one of
the developed tests, provides more than 99% specificity and sensitivity
when tested 14 d or more after the infection. It is suggested that the
instrument can return 100–200 test results in 1 h for detecting IgG
antibody (Abbott Laboratories, 2020b).
Pharmact AG (Berlin, Germany) has developed a fast and simple
serology test for the detection of SARS-CoV-2, the CoV-2 Rapid Test, that
detects the presence of IgM and IgG antibodies in the blood of suspected
cases with COVID-19. This test has been developed for POC use without
any need for laboratory equipment. The CoV-2 Rapid Test is similar to a
pregnancy test, but instead of urine, blood from fingertips and the buffer
solution are used, and after 20 min, the results are delivered. As the
blood-buffer solution passes through the test strip, if only the control
line is discolored the individual is not infected with SARS-CoV-2. If one
or both test lines are discolored, the individual is infected. This test
detects both IgM and IgG antibodies, and the test results for the detec­
tion of non-affected cases are cross-matched with PCR, showing 99.8%
agreement, which is an indication of the reliability of this test. Analyzing
the presence of the IgG antibody compared with the IgM antibody
provides a chance to determine the phase of the disease. The IgM dis­
colored test line illustrates the early stage infection within 4–10 d, while
the IgG discolored test line highlights the late-stage infection within
11–24 d. It should be noted that the test works only qualitatively and
does not give any data about the antibody levels. For further information
on the antibody levels, performing special tests in the laboratory are
necessary (Pharmact, 2020).
The quantitative serology test gives insights about the level of the
immune response in infected individuals. In addition, BioReference
Laboratories (Elmwood Park, NJ, USA) has developed an immunoassay
to measure the IgG antibody level secreted against SARS-CoV-2. As IgG
is usually developed after 10–14 d of infection, this test can be useful for
decisions about when the infected individual can return to work or when
restrictions about isolation or social distancing can be relaxed (Bio­
Reference Laboratory an OPKO Health Company, 2020).

The commercially available serology tests mentioned so far mainly
focus on the detection of IgG and IgM. However, other test kits have
been developed and launched that focus on the detection of IgA. For
instance, Euroimmun has developed a semi-quantitate ELISA test kit,
Anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgA (Euroimmun, 2020a). The Anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgA
detects IgA antibodies against the S protein with 98.3% specificity and
96.9% sensitivity when used 11–60 days post infection. Furthermore,
RayBiotech has developed two serology diagnostic kits to detect IgA.
One of these kits utilizes indirect ELISA to detect SARS-CoV-2 by tar­
geting the N protein while the other one targets the receptor binding
domain. These ELISA kits measure the amount of IgA in human serum
semi-quantitatively (RayBiotech, 2020).
Beijing Wantai Biological Pharmacy has launched two serology test
kits for COVID-19 diagnosis: a SARS-CoV-2 antibody ELISA which was
approved by the FDA on August 5, 2020, and an antibody rapid test
(Beijing, 2020). The Wantai SARS-CoV-2 Ab ELISA detects total anti­
bodies (IgM, IgG, and IgA antibodies) targeting the receptor binding
domain of S protein with 96.7% sensitivity and 97.5% specificity. The
rapid test also detects total antibodies against the receptor binding
domain using the double antigen sandwich technology and returns re­
sults in 15 min.
As well as the developed techniques and instruments described
above, several methods are currently in the development stage which
will be discussed briefly in the following.
The Beroni Group (New South Wales, Australia) in collaboration
with a scientific group from Tianjin University are currently working on
the development of a fast and accurate detection method for SARS-CoV2 by applying nanobody-based technology. By simulation, the structure
of the SARS-CoV-2 and possible neutralizing antibodies complex and the
crystal structure of nano-antibodies and antigen can be predicted. These
predictions are expected to give better information about the structural
properties that can then be further used to achieve a better affinity with
the SARS-CoV-2 antigen and to narrow down the “broad spectrum”
antibodies to specific ones. The use of nanobodies would improve the
detection rate and accuracy of SARS-CoV-2. This group is using nano­
bodies as they are more stable and less immunogenic (Tianjin Univer­
sity, 2020).

Table 2
Developed serology tests for SARS-CoV-2 detection by different companies and researchers.
Developer

Platform

Target antigen

Target
antibody

Other features

References

Abbott Laboratories

CMIA

Nucleocapsid

IgG

DiaSorin

CMIA

Spike

IgG

Abbott Laboratories
(2020b)
DiaSorin (2020)

Pharmact AG

Lateral flow
assay

–

IgG and
IgM

Hangzhou Biotest Biotech

Lateral flow
assay

Spike

IgG and
IgM

Return 100–200 test results in 1 h, specificity
99.6%, and sensitivity of 100%
Fully automated, quantitative, 97.4% sensitivity,
98.5 specificity
POC, results in 20 min, can determine the phase of
the disease, 99.8% agreement with PCR for nonaffected cases
100% specificity for IgM and IgG, 100% sensitivity
for IgM and 93.3% for IgG

Cellex

Lateral flow
assay
Lateral flow
assay

Spike and
Nucleocapsid
Nucleocapsid

IgG and
IgM
IgG and
IgM

Bio-Rad
Mount Sinai

ELISA
ELISA

Pan-Ig
IgG

Euroimmun

ELISA

Nucleocapsid
receptor binding
domain
Spike

Beijing Wantai Biological Pharmacy

ELISA

CDC

ELISA

receptor binding
domain
Spike

The Beroni Group with Tianjin University

–

–

IgG, IgM,
and IgA
IgG and
IgM
–

ChemBio Diagnostic Systems

IgG

9

93.8% sensitivity, 96% specificity, return results in
15–20 min
100% sensitivity for IgM and IgG after 15 days,
100% specificity for IgM and 95.9% for IgG, return
results in 15 min
92.2% sensitivity, 99.6% specificity
Indirect detection of antibody, 92% sensitivity,
100% specificity
90% sensitivity, 100% specificity, deliver the
result in 2 and a half h
6.7% sensitivity, 97.5% specificity

Pharmact (2020)
(Hangzhou Biotest
Biotech Company,
2020)
Cellex (2020)
(ChemBio Diagnostic
Systems, 2020)
Bio-Rad (2020)
Mount Sinai (2020)
Euroimmun (2020b)
(Beijing, 2020)

ELISA-based, specificity >99%, sensitivity of 96%

(Freeman et al., 2020)

Applying nanobody-based technology, improved
detection rate and accuracy, high stability, less
immunogenic

(Tianjin University,
2020)

N. Taleghani and F. Taghipour

Biosensors and Bioelectronics 174 (2021) 112830

Table 3
Description of the developed detection devices of SARS-CoV-2 from different companies and researchers.
Manufacturer

Method of detection

Bosch

Molecular test

Abbott Laboratories

Molecular test

Abbott Laboratories

Serology test

Pharmact AG

Serology test

Device

References
Bosch Global (2020)

Abbott Laboratories (2020a)

Abbott Laboratories (2020b)

Pharmact (2020)

Denka Company (Tokyo, Japan) has worked on the development of
diagnostic reagents for the detection and prevention of infectious dis­
eases such as Ebola and influenza in the past. As a result of the current
outbreak of COVID-19, Denka is working on the development of a simple
and fast detection kit by implementing not only immunochromato­
graphic methods but also antigen identification methods such as ELISA
for diagnosis of COVID-19. They are also working on the development of
tests that will be able to detect SARS-CoV-2 and other types of viruses
related to respiratory diseases simultaneously (Denka Company, 2020).

antibodies (Peeling et al., 2020). Assuming that an antigen test for the S
protein of SARS-CoV-2 was to be successfully developed, the best two
antibodies would have a high affinity toward the S protein at separate
sites, would not interfere with each other, and would not cross-react
with other S proteins of other coronaviruses. The second challenge is
the intensity of the signal. Unlike molecular methods, antigen tests do
not amplify the target molecule and for that reason, the sensitivity of
these tests is low compared with molecular tests. Moreover, the best
time to perform these tests is when the viral load is at its highest level.
Antigen tests have been developed for the detection of other viruses
such as influenza, HIV, and other infectious diseases, and some com­
mercial products have also been launched for the diagnosis of COVID19. For instance, Quidel Corporation (San Diego, CA, USA) developed
a qualitative diagnosis kit for COVID-19 which was approved by the FDA
on May 8, 2020 (Quidel Coroporation, 2020). The kit is an
immunofluorescence-based lateral flow technology called Sofia 2 SARS
Antigen Fluorescent Immunoassay that uses a sandwich design to detect
SARS-CoV-2 using N protein. This POC detection kit with automated
read returns results, without cross-reactivity with other coronaviruses,
within 15 min. The patients suspected of having COVID-19 provide a
nasal or nasopharyngeal swab sample, and the detection kit can be used
directly or after adding the viral transport media to the samples. Having
a 12-month shelf life makes the developed kit suitable for
transportation.
Given the challenges associated with the development of this class of
tests and the fact that they are not very common for the diagnosis of
infectious diseases especially COVID-19 diagnosis, in the subsequent

2.2.2. Antigen tests
Another set of immunoassays that can be utilized for COVID-19
diagnosis is antigen tests. This type of test detects the presence of viral
antigens and therefore can be implemented to detect the current infec­
tion the patient is fighting with, but it is unable to provide any infor­
mation regarding past infections. Samples for antigen testing are usually
taken from the nasal cavity using oropharyngeal, nasopharyngeal, or
nasal swab samples (CDC, 2020c; WHO, 2020d). Antigen tests do not
require special laboratory equipment, highly trained personnel, or spe­
cific reagents such as the ones needed for molecular tests. Therefore,
they are cost-effective for both mass production and administration.
Antigen tests return results in 15–20 min making them suitable for mass
screening in communities with a high number of patients and high risk
to others. Consequently, antigen tests are promising candidates for POC
diagnostic.
There are some challenges in the development of highly sensitive and
specific antigen tests; one of the main challenges is choosing the right
10

N. Taleghani and F. Taghipour

Biosensors and Bioelectronics 174 (2021) 112830

sections we do not discuss them further.

that predict the severity of COVID-19 patients. This team is working on
correlating specific biomarkers and gene expressions with the patients
suffering from mild, severe, and critical conditions of COVID-19. The
team is developing a POC system that would identify to which health­
care unit the patients be directed. The major challenge of implementing
these biomarkers for the diagnosis of COVID-19 and associating them
with different severity levels of the illness is the non-specificity of these
biomarkers to COVID-19 as there are also abnormal levels of these
biomarkers in other diseases.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the sputum sample were used as a
biomarker for the development of a real-time electrochemical biosensor
for the COVID-19 diagnosis (Miripour et al., 2020). As lung cells get
infected by the SARS-CoV-2, the mitochondrial ROS would be over­
produced, which is analogous to the significant increase in cellular ROS
for individuals infected by SARS-CoV (Lin et al., 2006). An increased
level of mitochondrial ROS enhances viral replication in the enterovirus
71 infection (Cheng et al., 2014), which may also be the case for the
SRAS-CoV-2 infection (Miripour et al., 2020); therefore, a high level
ROS can be employed as a biomarker for the COVID-19 diagnosis.
Fibrosis patients with chronic lung infection and patients of some other
respiratory diseases such as asthma and acute pneumonia suffer from the
increased level of ROS, which is in contrast with the seasonal influenza
as the ROS level decreases for the patients infected by influenza.
Therefore, ROS level can be a great biomarker to track suspected pa­
tients of COVID-19 and discriminate COVID-19 from influenza as these
two are more likely to be misdiagnosed with each other. The developed
biosensor utilizes three needle electrodes with a triangular distance of 3
mm from each other covered by functionalized multi-wall carbon
nanotubes. The biosensor was calibrated by comparing results with
clinical diagnostics of 142 individuals clinically confirmed as positive
and negative SARS-CoV-2 patients and 97% accuracy and sensitivity was
achieved. In the next step, samples from 30 individuals as suspected
cased of COVID-19 who needed to do chest CT were taken and the results
from the developed biosensor were compared to chest CT. The differ­
ences were less than 7% with less than 3% of false-negative results from
the electrochemical biosensor.
A biosensor for real-time and continuous detection of SARS-CoV-2
was developed which can be a suitable and reliable solution for the
clinical application (Qiu et al., 2020). The biosensor is a dual-function
localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) sensor which combines
the photothermal effect and plasmon sensing to detect the SARS-CoV-2
nucleic acid. LSPR sensor utilizes light and detects the localized reso­
nance oscillation of surface conduction electrons in the presence of the
target biomarker which leads to binding and affinity incidents at the
surface of plasmonic material and then changes the refractive index
(Anker et al., 2008). The localized effect is due to the presence of
nanomaterials on the surface which makes the system highly sensitive to
localized variations; two-dimensional gold nanoislands (AuNIs) are
functionalized with a complementary sequence to sensitively hybridize
with SARS-CoV-2 viral nucleic acid. AuNIs are plasmonic nanoparticles
that have high optical cross-sections and the energy of incident light
which is non-radiatively transferred into heat, a process called the
thermoplasmonic effect, which provides an in situ heat source for the
process (Jauffred et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2019). The localized thermo­
plasmonic heating is able to increase the temperature of hybridization,
which is followed by accurate discrimination of SARS-CoV-2 gene se­
quences among similar sequences with a 0.22 pM detection limit in a
multigene mixture.
Another biosensor consisting of the anti-SARS-CoV-2 S protein an­
tibodies immobilized on the graphene sheets of FET was developed for
the detection of SARS-CoV-2 in clinical samples by applying FET-based
biosensing (Seo et al., 2020). The graphene-based FET biosensor was
sensitive to the surrounding changes and provided optical signals
correlated with these changes that had a very low background signal.
The graphene-based FET biosensor discriminated SARS-CoV-2 protein
from that of MERS-CoV. This highly sensitive POC biosensor was able to

2.3. CT scan
A CT scan of the chest is a detailed specific chest X-ray that is taken
from different angles followed by the final cross-sectional image, which
helps in examining the abnormalities in the lungs and inside the chest to
further diagnose the cause of the abnormalities (Whiting et al., 2015). A
CT scan of the chest is a painless, non-invasive routine test for the
diagnosis of pneumonia and other respiratory diseases performed by
radiologists that can provide fast results and is easy to administer. As
with the other methods of SARS-CoV-2 detection, the involvement of
lungs is dependent on number of the days that have passed after the
onset of infection. A related study showed that in the first two days of
manifesting symptoms, 56% of the CTs of patients were found to be
normal, and the maximum observable abnormalities were around 10
d after manifesting symptoms (Bernheim et al., 2020).
Small-scale (Huang et al., 2020; Pakdemirli et al., 2020; Xie et al.,
2020) and larger-scale studies (Chung et al., 2020) have shown that
PCR-based methods have limited sensitivity and that chest CTs can
reveal abnormalities in almost all COVID-19 patients. This was found to
be the case even for asymptomatic individuals or patients with initial
negative RT-PCR but clinical symptoms, thus showing that CT scans
have higher sensitivity compared with RT-PCR (Ai et al., 2020; Fang
et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2020). CT, however, has disadvantages such as
low specificity as the features from COVID-19 patients are similar to
those of other viral cases of pneumonia (Ai et al., 2020). To show the
high sensitive value of chest CT as a diagnostic test, some research
groups have compared the results from the chest CT scan with RT-PCR.
A study (Fang et al., 2020) that compared the sensitivity of chest CT
with RT-PCR reported that chest CT had a sensitivity of 98% for
COVID-19 while RT-PCR sensitivity was 71% when 51 patients were
tested within 3 d. The study also suggested chest CT could be used as an
early diagnostic method of respiratory diseases such as COVID-19, while
RT-PCR could maintain its position as a standard of reference.
In a similar study on the sensitivity of RT-PCR and chest CT, a
comparison of the results from chest CT and the initial and serial RT-PCR
was performed (Ai et al., 2020). The results indicated that 59% of the
patients had positive RT-PCR, while the positive rate for chest CT was
88%. Also, 75% of the patients who were diagnosed negative by RT-PCR
had abnormalities in their chest CT and had positive chest CT for
COVID-19. The results from serial RT-PCR indicated that the average
time between initial negative RT-PCR to a positive one is 5.1 ± 1.5 d.
The false-negative results of initial RT-PCR were in line with the results
from other reported studies (Chung et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2020). These
false-negative results would aid the further spread of the virus, which
would not be desirable. In conclusion, the results highlighted that chest
CT is more sensitive compared with initial RT-PCR, and that, in epidemic
areas, it could be considered as the primary diagnosis method for
COVID-19.
2.4. Other methods
Several biomarkers that are present in biofluids may also be used for
the detection of SARS-CoV-2. It has been shown that the concentrations
of C-reactive protein, D-dimer, lymphocytes, leukocytes, and blood
platelets have increased in patients suffering from COVID-19 (Guan
et al., 2020). A study dedicated to statistical analysis of biochemical
markers to discriminate severe COVID-19 patients from mild ones
demonstrated that patients with severe conditions show noticeably
higher levels of serum urea, creatinine, and cystatin C compared with
those with the mild condition (Xiang et al., 2020a). All of these bio­
markers could be related to the glomerular filtration function that can be
used for the early diagnosis of severe COVID-19 and distinguish it from a
mild case. A similar study is being performed at Dalhousie University in
Halifax, Canada (Dalhousie University, 2020) to identify biomarkers
11

N. Taleghani and F. Taghipour

Biosensors and Bioelectronics 174 (2021) 112830

chest CT, chest X-ray machines provide the two-dimensional image of a
patient’s thorax, cost less than CT scan devices, and are mainly available
at all healthcare facilities. To overcome the limited sensitivity and
specificity of the conventional chest X-ray, especially compared to chest
CT, various AI technologies, including machine learning and deep
learning, have been developed to improve chest X-ray diagnostics per­
formance. Therefore, chest X-rays can be utilized for COVID-19 diag­
nosis using computer-aided diagnosis (Hemdan et al., 2020; Schiaffino
et al., 2020). Considering its improved diagnostic performance and ease
of operation, the chest X-ray can be implemented as a promising tech­
nique for COVID-19 diagnosis, especially in low-medium-income
countries. Fig. 8 demonstrates the best time of implementing each
method of detection at different stages post infection.

detect SARS-CoV-2 antigen protein in a nasopharyngeal swab transport
medium as well as in the cultured virus and clinical samples with a 2.42
× 102 copies/mL limit of detection in clinical samples for the detection
of the S protein. Fig. 7 shows the developed biosensor and its mechanism
of operation.
3. Comparison of the developed methods
Each of the developed methods for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 is
suitable for specific situations, but each has some drawbacks, so the
search has continued for other detection techniques that have higher
sensitivity, better specificity, and lower detection time. Here, we
compare the aforementioned methods in brief, and we compare the
developed methods in brief and propose several potentially promising
detection methods for the diagnosis of COVID-19 in the following
section.
The main disadvantage of PCR-based methods is the limited sensi­
tivity that can lead to false-negative results in the early stages of infec­
tion, which disqualifies the use of these methods alone to identify an
individual as not infected, therefore requiring clinical observation and
patient’s history to be considered. Performing PCR-based tests also re­
quires specific facilities and equipment with trained staff, which many
healthcare facilities in small cities or outside urban cities may not be
equipped with. Also, due to the limited availability of reagents, the PCRbased tests are in short supply. Furthermore, they are invasive, timeconsuming methods taking up to several hours to return results. More­
over, PCR-based methods detect the presence of the SARS-CoV-2;
therefore, if an individual was infected asymptomatically with SARSCoV-2 and then recovered from it, PCR-based methods are not able to
track that person while serology tests can detect that.
Serology tests can detect the people who have previously been
infected and the ones that are currently ill, so they would give a better
insight into the actual COVID-19 infection level of the population. They
can also be implemented to determine the phase of infection based on
the level of different antibodies in the patient’s sample. On the negative
side, serology tests do not show the virus itself, but the antibody against
it. Therefore, they have the drawback of producing false-negative results
in the early stage of infection, sharing the main disadvantage of the PCRbased methods. A chest CT is more sensitive compared with the two
abovementioned methods, especially in the early stages. However, it
requires expensive equipment with technical experts to operate it, and
as the chest abnormalities are similar to those of other viral cases of
pneumonia, it cannot specifically diagnose COVID-19. In contrast to

4. Future perspectives
To overcome the shortcomings of the existing detection methods,
here we propose several methods and technologies for the potentially
sensitive and specific POC detection of SARS-CoV-2, inspired to some
extent by the methods developed for the detection of other viruses,
including SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV. Many diverse technologies have
been used thus far for the fast, accurate, and specific detection of SARSCoV and MERS-CoV, including, but not limited to, using functionalized
nanostructures to improve the sensitivity of PCR-based methods, the use
of aptamers functionalized with quantum dots (QDs), semiconductorbased binding assays, surface plasmon resonance-based assays, paperbased assays, piezoelectric immune sensors, and electrochemical sen­
sors. Some of these methods are suitable for mass testing and, conse­
quently, for the identification of asymptomatic patients to control the
further spread of COVID-19. We will discuss some of these key methods
in the following subsections.
4.1. Lateral flow assays
One of the promising technologies for fast, accurate, and costeffective detection of SARS-CoV-2 is the lateral flow assay (LFA). LFAs
do not need any specific instrument for qualitative detection, which
makes them a promising method of detection for POC diagnosis (Fu
et al., 2011). LFAs usually consist of four pads (Fig. 9); the sample pad
that is used to receive the sample, the conjugation pad consisting of
specific antibodies and/or antigens conjugated with labels, the mem­
brane that drags the sample solution to the test and control line using
capillary forces, and then the absorption pad that collects the sample in

Fig. 7. Schematic diagram of the detection process performed by the graphene-based FET biosensor. The principle of operation is based on the interaction of the
SARS-CoV-2 S protein with the SARS-CoV-2 S protein antibodies immobilized on the graphene sensing material. After taking the sample and adding the clinical
transport medium, the prepared sample is transferred to the laboratory, where the FET biosensor is used for the detection of SARS-CoV-2.
12

N. Taleghani and F. Taghipour

Biosensors and Bioelectronics 174 (2021) 112830

Fig. 8. Schematic diagram illustrating the capability of each detection method with regard to the post infection time of SARS-CoV-2. As the cone cross section
increases, the results from the detection method become more reliable for the COVID-19 diagnosis. Chest CT would be the most sensitive method of detection at early
stages and as time passes the sensitivity of molecular methods especially RT-PCR increases. Serology tests would be more suitable at the late stages and even after
recovery, as the antibodies are still available in the patient’s sample.
Fig. 9. Illustration of an LFA, the mecha­
nism of detection, and the final result’s
appearance. In the presence of a SARS-CoV-2
positive result, the anti-SARS-CoV-2 anti­
bodies attach to their label on the conjuga­
tion pad and make a complex. The complex
reaches the test line using capillary forces
and attaches to the antibodies immobilized
there. Regarding the control line, as the
sample flows through the assay, the labeled
antibodies for the control line move toward
the control line and attach to the immobi­
lized antibodies on the control line. In the
absence of SARS-CoV-2, there is no forma­
tion of a complex and no attachment on the
test line. However, as the flow passes
through the assay, the labeled antibodies for
the control line move toward the control
line, and attach on the control line.

the final part. As the sample flows through the assay and reaches the
conjugation pad, the biomarker (anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibody here) is
attached to its specific conjugated antigen and forms a complex. Then,
the complex reaches the test line containing immobilized capture re­
agents, such as the biomarker-specific antibodies that capture the
complex of the biomarker and the conjugated antigen. The LFA’s oper­
ation is based on a sandwich immunoassay that captures the target
molecule and shows different signals (colors) on the test and control line
based on the labels. The labels are usually colloidal gold, carbon, or
latex. LFAs mainly operate by detecting the antibodies secreted in
response to the presence of pathogens. Clinical studies have illustrated a
sensitivity of 82% when detecting both IgM and IgG (Xiang et al.,
2020b), which can be further improved by using novel nanoparticles.
Different LFAs are under development or have already been devel­
oped for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 (Xiang et al., 2020b). They will
mainly detect the IgM and IgG antibodies, so the test may provide
false-negative results in early stages. The molecular tests can also be
combined with LFAs as the incorporation of RT-LAMP and LFAs was
implemented for the detection of MERS-CoV, but they also had low
sensitivity (Huang et al., 2018). A single antibody assay has been
developed to detect Escherichia coli, where a hydrophilic, porous, and
photoluminescence-quenching platform was engineered for the simple
but highly sensitive detection of small- and large-size targets (Chee­
veewattanagul et al., 2017). The main challenges associated with the
LFAs are the suitable time to take the test and the sensitivity. To address

these challenges, a promising technique would be the development of an
LFA that can detect the SARS-CoV-2 instead of antibodies and applying
some of the signal amplification strategies, including implementation of
plasmonic nanoparticles, carbon nanomaterials, organic molecules, and
dual sensitizers that would respond to even low concentrations of
SARS-CoV-2 in the early stages of infection.
4.2. Paper-based devices
Paper-based analytical devices can be an answer to the current
challenges of complicated sample preparation associated with molecular
detection tests of COVID-19. Paper-based devices consist of different
functional parts that have been integrated with different molecular
amplification technologies, such as PCR or LAMP, to detect different
pathogens quantitatively. These integrated devices are simple, easy to
operate, and easy to store and transport; at the same time, they offer fast,
sensitive, and precise detection of different pathogens. These devices
perform the detection procedure with simple folding of different parts in
different ways (similar to origami) that leads to extraction and purifi­
cation, elution, amplification, and finally detection. In the past, malaria
species were detected using paper folding of whole blood for sample
preparation, along with isothermal amplification and lateral flow
detection (Reboud et al., 2019). The developed biosensor returned the
results in less than 50 min with 98% sensitivity which was higher than
that achieved by the commercial immunodiagnostic test. The developed
13

N. Taleghani and F. Taghipour

Biosensors and Bioelectronics 174 (2021) 112830

biosensor addressed the challenges of detection without using labora­
tory equipment and infrastructure. Other paper-based devices have been
developed for the diagnosis of infectious pathogens, such as the human
papillomavirus, Zika virus, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and
rotavirus (Mao et al., 2020).
Using paper-based technologies has been proposed for the detection
of SARS-CoV-2 (Mao et al., 2020). As the diagnosis of all suspected cases
from their home would be time-consuming, the implementation of
paper-based devices to predict the spread of COVID-19 and the detection
of SARS-CoV-2 in wastewater was proposed. Recent studies found that
feces and urine samples of infected individuals may carry live
SARS-CoV-2 that can later enter the wastewater system (Holshue et al.,
2020). Consequently, the analysis of the wastewater system and sewage
pipe networks would be a suitable procedure to track the suspected
COVID-19 patients in local areas. The results of the local wastewater
analysis would be used to mitigate the spread of the virus; however, this
analysis would have to be fast and the technology used for the detection
transportable, fast, and accurate to detect low concentrations of
SARS-CoV-2. Therefore, paper-based devices have been suggested for
wastewater analysis. One possible challenge could be the complex ma­
trix of wastewater which was previously addressed by developing a
method for fast quantitative detection of the viral genome of pathogens
using sewage as a sample (Yang et al., 2017).

quartz crystal microbalance and microcantilever. Piezoelectric devices
consist of a substrate and a piezoelectric crystal, which is mass sensitive;
any changes in the mass attached to the resonator surface affect the
resonant frequency. The principle of operation is associated with the
interactions of two molecules: a biorecognition element, which is an
antibody or a membrane, immobilized on the piezoelectric crystal sur­
face, and a biomolecule interacting with the surface film. The increased
mass as the result of affinity interaction between the two molecules
results in a decrease in the frequency (Kurosawa et al., 2006; Pohanka,
2017). Due to the high sensitivity of the piezoelectric crystal surface to
small changes on covered areas, such as a small number of viral antigen
molecules or the entire virus, any change of medium would be detected
and the analysis time would be shortened (Stobiecka et al., 2017).
Therefore, piezoelectric devices are excellent methods of detection for
viruses and bacteria as they usually consist of high macromolecular
entities (Caygill et al., 2010). Further, they are simple, cost-effective,
highly sensitive, and specific devices, having a small footprint, there­
fore suitable for POC diagnosis (Pohanka, 2017; Zuo et al., 2004). Their
operations do not require any sample preparation, and they are able to
return results in a couple of minutes that make them suitable for situa­
tions requiring large screening of the population such as those during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
To develop a highly sensitive piezoelectric device with the highest
capture capacity, the optimized concentration and orientation of the
recognition element should provide the best access of interacting regions
between two molecules and play a crucial role. To utilize the optimum
concentration, the theoretical total mass changes of the recognition
element adsorbed on a resonator surface would be estimated for
different orientations based on dimensions of the recognition element.
The theoretical mass in vertical orientation corresponds to the optimized
concentration of the recognition element which provides the highest
capture capacity in the vertical orientation (Stobiecka et al., 2016).
Piezoelectric devices have been applied for the detection of many vi­
ruses, such as herpes virus, HBV, HIV, influenza, and SARS (Erofeev
et al., 2019; Moudgil and Swaminathan, 2015; Pohanka, 2017). A
piezoelectric immunosensor was developed for the detection of
SARS-CoV in sputum (Zuo et al., 2004). Horse polyclonal antibodies
against SARS-CoV were immobilized on the piezoelectric crystal surface
to specifically adsorb the SARS antigen which resulted in a frequency
shift; the changes in frequency were linear with the change in concen­
tration in the optimal condition. The developed immunosensor was
stable and provided reproducible results in less than 2 min. Considering
the portability, cost-effectiveness, and fast response delivered by
piezoelectric devices, along with the confirmed potential of these de­
vices in the detection of viruses with similar genomic structures to that
of SARS-CoV-2, these devices are promising as the means for the fast and
accurate detection of SARS-CoV-2, especially for surveilling the virus
spread in small cities or outside urban cities that may not be equipped
with specific facilities.

4.3. Microfluidic devices
Integration of microfluidics for the detection of pathogens such as
SARS-CoV-2 can provide many benefits, including portability and POC
detection, higher ratios of the surface to volume, ability to operate with
small sample volume, and better heat and mass transfer, all of which
lead to fast and accurate detection and cost-effectiveness (Foudeh et al.,
2012; Yager et al., 2006). These devices have to be stable over an
acceptable range of temperatures and humidity and provide platforms
that are easy to operate, perform sensitive analyses, and lead to specific
results. Microfluidic devices consist of channels and reaction chambers
in the size of micrometers that provide the ability to perform sample
preparation, including separations with high resolution and speed.
Microfluidic devices have been implemented for the detection of
different biomarkers, such as antibodies, other proteins, toxins, and even
the whole cell, and they have been used for the detection of many vi­
ruses, including, but not limited to, rotaviruses, influenza virus, HIV,
hepatitis B virus (HBV), Zika virus, and SARS (Nasseri et al., 2018; Zhou
et al., 2004).
Multiple microfluidic devices have been designed to be combined
with molecular amplification techniques, including PCR and isothermal
methods (Basiri et al., 2020). Microfluidic devices can perform multi­
plex detections which can be especially advantageous in the diagnosis of
diseases with similar symptoms, such as SARS-CoV-2, that have common
symptoms with other viral pneumonias. A microfluidic device was also
developed for the molecular detection of HIV, where the designed
nucleic acid probes were conjugated with magnetic beads for the puri­
fication of the HIV viral genome (Wang et al., 2012). The microfluidic
system incorporated with PCR targeted four detection genes of HIV to
improve sensitivity and specificity and to reduce the rate of
false-negative results. Their integrated microfluidic system was able to
return optical results within 95 min. Given that this method has shown
success for the detection of other viruses, and considering its ease of use
and versatility, the incorporation of microfluidic devices with other
detection techniques could be a promising approach for SARS-CoV-2
detection.

4.5. Artificial intelligence (AI)
AI can be implemented to diagnose COVID-19 using X-rays or CT
scans of the chest. As stated earlier, CT scans are more sensitive
compared with the other methods of detection, but one of the main
challenges is training the technical experts to analyze the images. To
address this challenge, AI can be implemented for the rapid and low-cost
detection of SARS-CoV-2 from X-rays or CT scans (Jin et al., 2020). The
use of AI for diagnosis would also save considerable time and effort from
radiologists. By collecting the data representative of the whole popula­
tion of study and using deep learning algorithms, AI applications can be
developed to diagnose COVID-19 accurately. In fact, several AI appli­
cations are currently under development or have already been devel­
oped for the diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2.
The COVID-Net was developed using deep convolutional neural
network design that uses information gained from different lung

4.4. Piezoelectric devices
Another method used for the detection of different viruses is the
piezoelectric method, which consists of an electromechanical device
which works based on changes in the mass of a substrate including
14

Biosensors and Bioelectronics 174 (2021) 112830

N. Taleghani and F. Taghipour

conditions and conditions related to SARS-CoV-2 and analyzes the chest
X-ray to diagnose COVID-19 with 92.4% accuracy; moreover, the
COVID-Net is open source and can be used by different facilities (Wang
and Wong, 2020). A 3D deep learning model, CoV-Net, was developed
using a neural network that can discriminate between COVID-19 and
other lung diseases with 97.17% area under curve, 90.19% sensitivity,
and 95.76% specificity (Jin et al., 2020). A platform was proposed that
can diagnose COVID-19 using smartphone sensors (Maghdid et al.,
2020). As smartphones are being used by almost everyone these days
and they are equipped with many sensors, such as cameras, micro­
phones, and humidity and temperature sensors as well as having wire­
less connections, the proposed platform would be a cost-effective
solution for the surveillance of COVID-19. In the proposed platform, an
AI application uses the smartphone sensors’ signal measurements and
predicts the level of severity of pneumonia and the cause of that pneu­
monia. Given the fast-growing implementation of AI in everyday life and
the proven success of AI in decision-making and saving time, effort, and
resources, AI along with deep learning methods can be suitable to
identify the abnormalities associated with SARS-CoV-2 in chest CT and
X-ray.

Ai, T., Yang, Z., Hou, H., Zhan, C., Chen, C., Lv, W., Tao, Q., Sun, Z., Xia, L., 2020.
Radiology. https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2020200642, 200642.
Andersen, K.G., Rambaut, A., Lipkin, W.I., Holmes, E.C., Garry, R.F., 2020. Nat. Med. 26,
450–452. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0820-9.
Anker, J.N., Hall, W.P., Lyandres, O., Shah, N.C., Zhao, J., Van Duyne, R.P., 2008. Nat.
Mater. 7, 442–453. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat2162.
Basiri, A., Heidari, A., Nadi, M.F., Fallahy, M.T.P., Nezamabadi, S.S., Sedighi, M.,
Saghazadeh, A., Rezaei, N., 2020. Rev. Med. Virol. https://doi.org/10.1002/
rmv.2154 e2154.
Beijing, 2020. Wantai Biological Pharmacy. http://www.ystwt.cn/covid-19/. (Accessed
5 November 2020).
Bermingham, A., Chand, M.A., Brown, C.S., Aarons, E., Tong, C., Langrish, C.,
Hoschler, K., Brown, K., Galiano, M., Myers, R., Pebody, R.G., Green, H.K.,
Boddington, N.L., Gopal, R., Price, N., Newsholme, W., Drosten, C., Fouchier, R.A.,
Zambon, M., 2012. Euro Surveill. 17, 20290. https://doi.org/10.2807/
ese.17.40.20290-en.
Bernheim, A., Mei, X., Huang, M., Yang, Y., Fayad, Z.A., Zhang, N., Diao, K., Lin, B.,
Zhu, X., Li, K., Li, S., Shan, H., Jacobi, A., Chung, M., 2020. Radiology 295, 200463.
https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2020200463.
BGI, 2020. https://www.bgi.com/us/sars-cov-2-real-time-fluorescent-rt-pcr-kit-ivd/.
(Accessed 14 June 2020).
Bio-Rad, 2020. https://www.bio-rad.com/featured/en/sars-cov-2-covid-19-testing-solut
ions.html. (Accessed 14 June 2020).
Biolabs, C., 2020. https://sars-cov-2.creative-biolabs.com/molecular-diagn
ostic-assay-development-services-for-detection-of-sars-cov2.htm?gclid=CjwKCA
jw7e_0BRB7EiwAlH goE4Tv9EClSi0NoqWd46iwAnxiYQnQAohcYmjcALUVA
d9XO4m5iB2yxoCL0cQAvD_BwE. (Accessed 14 June 2020).
BioReference Laboratory an OPKO Health Company, 2020. https://www.bioreference.
com/physicians/covid-19/. (Accessed 14 June 2020).
Bosch Global, 2020. https://www.bosch.com/stories/vivalytic-rapid-test-for-covid-19/.
(Accessed 14 June 2020).
Capheid, 2020. https://www.cepheid.com/coronavirus. (Accessed 14 June 2020).
Caygill, R.L., Blair, G.E., Millner, P.A., 2010. Anal. Chim. Acta 681 (1–2), 8–15. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2010.09.038.
CDC, 2020a. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/lab/guidelines-clinical-speci
mens.html. (Accessed 14 June 2020).
CDC, 2020b.
CDC, 2020c. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/lab/resources/antigen-te
sts-guidelines.html. (Accessed 11 July 2020).
Cellex, 2020. https://cellexcovid.com/. (Accessed 25 August 2020).
Chan, J.F.W., Kok, K.H., Zhu, Z., Chu, H., To, K.K.W., Yuan, S., Yuen, K.Y., 2020a. Emerg.
Microb. Infect. 9, 221–236. https://doi.org/10.1080/22221751.2020.1719902.
Chan, J.F.W., Yuan, S., Kok, K.H., To, K.K.W., Chu, H., Yang, J., Xing, F., Liu, J., Yip, C.C.
Y., Poon, R.W.S., Tsoi, H.W., Lo, S.K.F., Chan, K.H., Poon, V.K.M., Chan, W.M., Ip, J.
D., Cai, J.P., Cheng, V.C.C., Chen, H., Hui, C.K.M., Yuen, K.Y., 2020b. Lancet 395,
514–523. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30154-9.
Cheeveewattanagul, N., Morales-Narváez, E., Hassan, A.R.H.A., Bergua, J.F.,
Surareungchai, W., Somasundrum, M., Merkoçi, A., 2017. Adv. Funct. Mater. 27
https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201702741.
ChemBio Diagnostic Systems, 2020. https://chembio.com/dpp-covid-19-igm-igg-syst
em-ous-2/. (Accessed 25 August 2020).
Cheng, M.L., Weng, S.F., Kuo, C.H., Ho, H.Y., 2014. PLoS One 9. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0113234.
Chung, M., Bernheim, A., Mei, X., Zhang, N., Huang, M., Zeng, X., Cui, J., Xu, W.,
Yang, Y., Fayad, Z.A., Jacobi, A., Li, K., Li, S., Shan, H., 2020. Radiology 295,
202–207. https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2020200230.
Cui, F., Zhou, H.S., 2020. Biosens. Bioelectron. 165, 112349. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bios.2020.112349.
Dalhousie University, 2020. https://www.dal.ca/news/2020/04/01/covid-19-rese
archers-profile–dr–david-kelvin.html. (Accessed 14 June 2020).
De Wit, E., Van Doremalen, N., Falzarano, D., Munster, V.J., 2016. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
14, 523–534. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro.2016.81.
Denka Company, 2020.
DiaSorin, 2020. https://www.diasorin.com/en/immunodiagnostic-solutions/clini
cal-areas/infectious-diseases/covid-19. (Accessed 14 June 2020).
Erofeev, A.S., Gorelkin, P.V., Kolesov, D.V., Kiselev, G.A., Dubrovin, E.V., Yaminsky, I.V.,
2019. R. Soc. Open Sci. 6 https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.190255.
Euroimmun, 2020a. https://www.coronavirus-diagnostics.com/antibody-detection-tests
-for-covid-19.html. (Accessed 11 May 2020).
Euroimmun, 2020b.
Fadaka, A.O., Sibuyi, N.R.S., Adewale, O.B., Bakare, O.O., Akanbi, M.O., Klein, A.,
Madiehe, A.M., Meyer, M., 2020. J. Int. Med. Res. 48 https://doi.org/10.1177/
0300060520949077, 030006052094907.
Fang, Y., Zhang, H., Xie, J., Lin, M., Ying, L., Pang, P., Ji, W., 2020. Radiology. https://
doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2020200432, 200432.
FDA, 2020. https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/emergency-situations-medical-devic
es/emergency-use-authorizations#covid19ivd. (Accessed 14 June 2020).
Fehr, A.R., Channappanavar, R., Perlman, S., 2017. Annu. Rev. Med. 68, 387–399.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-med-051215-031152.
Foudeh, A.M., Fatanat Didar, T., Veres, T., Tabrizian, M., 2012. Lab Chip. https://doi.
org/10.1039/c2lc40630f.
Freeman, B., Lester, S., Mills, L., Ata, M., Rasheed, U., Moye, S., Abiona, O.,
Hutchinson, G.B., Morales-Betoulle, M., Krapinunaya, I., Gibbons, A., Chiang, C.F.,
Cannon, D., Klena, J., Johnson, J.A., Owen, S.M., Graham, B.S., Corbett, K.S.,
Thornburg, N.J., 2020. Biorxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.24.057323.

5. Summary and conclusion
The knowledge from the detection of other infectious viruses, espe­
cially SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, has played an important role and
paved the way for the rapid and accurate diagnosis of COVID-19.
Identification of the SARS-CoV-2 genome sequence in less than a
month has led to the fast development and establishment of the NAATs
as the main method of COVID-19 diagnosis, which is the first step in
restricting the further spread of the virus. Serology tests have also
attracted much attention, as they are easier to operate and provide
better insights into all infected individuals compared with NAATs.
Recent technologies and methods that have been implemented for the
diagnosis of COVID-19 have been discussed here based on their princi­
ples of operation as well as the value they add to the detection of the
virus and their drawbacks. As diagnostic methods are an essential part of
dealing with outbreaks, it becomes necessary to address the challenges
of existing methods, develop more efficient methods, and detect all
infected individuals rapidly and accurately in early stages, even for the
asymptomatic carriers of COVID-19. With that aim, we have proposed
some of the promising methods that could potentially be applied to
prevent and control the further spread of COVID-19 and other possible
pandemic outbreaks in the future, including LFAs, paper-based tech­
niques, microfluidic modules, and piezoelectric devices. These tech­
nologies can address the urgent necessity for the development of POC
and multiplex tests to some extent and help prevent the further
pandemic outbreak by getting the results for clinics and small healthcare
facilities easier, faster, and more accurately.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to acknowledge the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) for its financial
support.
References
Abbott Laboratories, 2020a. https://www.abbott.com/corpnewsroom/product-and-inno
vation/detect-covid-19-in-as-little-as-5-minutes.html. (Accessed 14 June 2020).
Abbott Laboratories, 2020b. https://www.abbott.com/corpnewsroom/product-andinnovation/abbott-launches-covid-19-antibody-test.html. (Accessed 14 June 2020).

15

N. Taleghani and F. Taghipour

Biosensors and Bioelectronics 174 (2021) 112830

Freeman, W.M., Walker, S.J., Vrana, K.E., 1999. Biotechniques. https://doi.org/
10.2144/99261rv01.
Fu, E., Liang, T., Houghtaling, J., Ramachandran, S., Ramsey, S.A., Lutz, B., Yager, P.,
2011. Anal. Chem. 83, 7941–7946. https://doi.org/10.1021/ac201950g.
Garcia-Rodriguez, C., Levy, R., Arndt, J.W., Forsyth, C.M., Razai, A., Lou, J., Geren, I.,
Stevens, R.C., Marks, J.D., 2007. Nat. Biotechnol. 25, 107–116. https://doi.org/
10.1038/nbt1269.
Gootenberg, J.S., Abudayyeh, O.O., Lee, J.W., Essletzbichler, P., Dy, A.J., Joung, J.,
Verdine, V., Donghia, N., Daringer, N.M., Freije, C.A., Myhrvold, C.,
Bhattacharyya, R.P., Livny, J., Regev, A., Koonin, E.V., Hung, D.T., Sabeti, P.C.,
Collins, J.J., Zhang, F., 2017. Science (80-. ) 356, 438–442. https://doi.org/
10.1126/science.aam9321.
Gorbalenya, A.E., Baker, S.C., Baric, R.S., de Groot, R.J., Drosten, C., Gulyaeva, A.A.,
Haagmans, B.L., Lauber, C., Leontovich, A.M., Neuman, B.W., Penzar, D.,
Perlman, S., Poon, L.L., Samborskiy, D., Sidorov, I.A., Sola, I., Ziebuhr, J., 2020. Nat.
Microbiol. 5, 536–544. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.07.937862.
Gordon, D., Jang, G., Bouhaddou, M., Xu, J., Obernier, K., O’Meara, M., Guo, J.,
Swaney, D., Tummino, T., Hüttenhain, R., Kaake, R., Richards, A., Tutuncuoglu, B.,
Foussard, H., Batra, J., Haas, K., Modak, M., Kim, M., Haas, P., Polacco, B.,
Braberg, H., Fabius, J., Eckhardt, M., Soucheray, M., Bennett, M., Cakir, M.,
McGregor, M., Li, Q., Naing, Z.Z.C., Zhou, Y., Peng, S., Kirby, I., Melnyk, J.,
Chorba, J., Lou, K., Dai, S., Shen, W., Shi, Y., Zhang, Z., Barrio-Hernandez, I.,
Memon, D., Hernandez-Armenta, C., Mathy, C., Perica, T., Pilla, K., Ganesan, S.,
Saltzberg, D., Ramachandran, R., Liu, X., Rosenthal, S., Calviello, L.,
Venkataramanan, S., Lin, Y., Wankowicz, S., Bohn, M., Trenker, R., Young, J.,
Cavero, D., Hiatt, J., Roth, T., Rathore, U., Subramanian, A., Noack, 2020. In:
Hubert, M., Roesch, F., Vallet, T., Meyer, B., White, K., Miorin, L., Agard, D.,
Emerman, M., Ruggero, D., García-Sastre, A., Jura, N., Zastrowvon, M., Taunton, J.,
Schwartz, O., Vignuzzi, M., d’Enfert, C., Mukherjee, S., Jacobson, M., Malik, H.,
Fujimori, D., Ideker, T., Craik, C., Floor, S., Fraser, J., Gross, J., Sali, A.,
Kortemme, T., Beltrao, P., Shokat, K., Shoichet, B., Krogan, N. (Eds.), Nat 583,
459–468. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2286-9.
Gronowski, A.M., 2018. Electron. J. Int. Fed. Clin. Chem. Lab. Med. 29, 201–204.
Guan, Y., Zheng, B.J., He, Y.Q., Liu, X.L., Zhuang, Z.X., Cheung, C.L., Luo, S.W., Li, P.H.,
Zhang, L.J., Guan, Y.J., Butt, K.M., Wong, K.L., Chan, K.W., Lim, W., Shortridge, K.
F., Yuen, K.Y., Peiris, J.S.M., Poon, L.L.M., 2003. Science (80-. ) 302, 276–278.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1087139.
Guan, W., Ni, Z., Hu, Y., Liang, W., Ou, C., He, J., Liu, L., Shan, H., Lei, C., Hui, D.S.C.,
Du, B., Li, L., Zeng, G., Yuen, K.Y., Chen, R., Tang, C., Wang, T., Chen, P., Xiang, J.,
Li, S., Wang, J.L., Liang, Z., Peng, Y., Wei, L., Liu, Y., Hu, Y.H., Peng, P., Wang, J.M.,
Liu, J., Chen, Z., Li, G., Zheng, Z., Qiu, S., Luo, J., Ye, C., Zhu, S., Zhong, N., 2020.
N. Engl. J. Med. 382, 1708–1720. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2002032.
Hajian, R., Balderston, S., Tran, T., deBoer, T., Etienne, J., Sandhu, M., Wauford, N.A.,
Chung, J.Y., Nokes, J., Athaiya, M., Paredes, J., Peytavi, R., Goldsmith, B.,
Murthy, N., Conboy, I.M., Aran, K., 2019. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3, 427–437. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41551-019-0371-x.
Hangzhou Biotest Biotech Company, 2020. http://en.biotests.com.cn/product/
278188250. (Accessed 29 August 2020).
Hemdan, E.E.-D., Shouman, M.A., Karar, M.E., 2020.
Hijawi, B., Abdallat, M., Sayaydeh, A., Alqasrawi, S., Haddadin, A., Jaarour, N.,
Alsheikh, S., Alsanouri, T., 2013. East. Mediterr. Health J. 19, 12–18. https://doi.
org/10.26719/2013.19.supp1.s12.
Holshue, M.L., DeBolt, C., Lindquist, S., Lofy, K.H., Wiesman, J., Bruce, H., Spitters, C.,
Ericson, K., Wilkerson, S., Tural, A., Diaz, G., Cohn, A., Fox, L.A., Patel, A., Gerber, S.
I., Kim, L., Tong, S., Lu, X., Lindstrom, S., Pallansch, M.A., Weldon, W.C., Biggs, H.
M., Uyeki, T.M., Pillai, S.K., 2020. N. Engl. J. Med. 382, 929–936. https://doi.org/
10.1056/NEJMoa2001191.
Huang, P., Wang, H., Cao, Z., Jin, H., Chi, H., Zhao, J., Yu, B., Yan, F., Hu, X., Wu, F.,
Jiao, C., Hou, P., Xu, S., Zhao, Y., Feng, N., Wang, J., Sun, W., Wang, T., Gao, Y.,
Yang, S., Xia, X., 2018. Front. Microbiol. 9, 1101. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmicb.2018.01101.
Huang, C., Wang, Y., Li, X., Ren, L., Zhao, J., Hu, Y., Zhang, L., Fan, G., Xu, J., Gu, X.,
Cheng, Z., Yu, T., Xia, J., Wei, Y., Wu, W., Xie, X., Yin, W., Li, H., Liu, M., Xiao, Y.,
Gao, H., Guo, L., Xie, J., Wang, G., Jiang, R., Gao, Z., Jin, Q., Wang, J., Cao, B., 2020.
Lancet 395, 497–506. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30183-5.
Huang, P., Liu, T., Huang, L., Liu, H., Lei, M., Xu, W., Hu, X., Chen, J., Liu, B., 2020.
Radiology. https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2020200330.
Imai, Y., Kuba, K., Rao, S., Huan, Y., Guo, F., Guan, B., Yang, P., Sarao, R., Wada, T.,
Leong-Poi, H., Crackower, M.A., Fukamizu, A., Hui, C.-C., Hein, L., Uhlig, S.,
Slutsky, A.S., Jiang, C., Penninger, J.M., 2005. Nature 436, 112–116. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nature03712.
Jauffred, L., Samadi, A., Klingberg, H., Bendix, P.M., Oddershede, L.B., 2019. Chem. Rev.
119 (13), 8087–8130. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00738.
Jin, C., Chen, W., Cao, Y., Xu, Z., Tan, Z., Zhang, X., Deng, L., Zheng, C., Zhou, J., Shi, H.,
Feng, J., 2020. Nat. Communications. 11. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-18
685-1.
Joung, J., Abudayyeh, O.O., Gootenberg, J.S., Ladha, A., 2020. . Medrxiv 8–10. https://
doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.07.20055947.
Kageyama, T., Kojima, S., Shinohara, M., Uchida, K., Fukushi, S., Hoshino, F.B.,
Takeda, N., Katayama, K., 2003. J. Clin. Microbiol. 41, 1548–1557. https://doi.org/
10.1128/JCM.41.4.1548-1557.2003.
Kellner, R.J.; Mermet, J.M.; Otto, M.; and Widmer, H.M.; Born, J.L., 1998. , New York:
Wiley-VCH. American Chemical Society (ACS). https://doi.org/10.1021/
jm9804836.
Kellner, M.J., Koob, J.G., Gootenberg, J.S., Abudayyeh, O.O., Zhang, F., 2019. Nat.
Protoc. 14, 2986–3012. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-019-0210-2.

Kim, M., Lee, J.H., Nam, J.M., 2019. Adv. Sci. 6 (17) https://doi.org/10.1002/
advs.201900471.
Klompus, S., Leviatan, S., Vogl, T., Kalka, I.N., Godneva, A., Weinberger, A., Segal, E.,
2020. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.01.20182220.
Kuba, K., Imai, Y., Rao, S., Gao, H., Guo, F., Guan, B., Huan, Y., Yang, P., Zhang, Y.,
Deng, W., Bao, L., Zhang, B., Liu, G., Wang, Z., Chappell, M., Liu, Y., Zheng, D.,
Leibbrandt, A., Wada, T., Slutsky, A.S., Liu, D., Qin, C., Jiang, C., Penninger, J.M.,
2005. Nat. Med. 11, 875–879. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm1267.
Kumar, S., 2020. . Preprints. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202003.0440.v1.
Kurosawa, S., Park, J.W., Aizawa, H., Wakida, S.I., Tao, H., Ishihara, K., 2006. Biosens.
Bioelectron. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2006.06.030.
La Marca, A., Capuzzo, M., Paglia, T., Roli, L., Trenti, T., Nelson, S.M., 2020. Reprod.
Biomed. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rbmo.2020.06.001. Online.
Lau, S.K.P., Woo, P.C.Y., Li, K.S.M., Huang, Y., Tsoi, H.W., Wong, B.H.L., Wong, S.S.Y.,
Leung, S.Y., Chan, K.H., Yuen, K.Y., 2005. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102,
14040–14045. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0506735102.
Lee, M.S., Lin, Y.C., Lai, G.H., Lai, S.Y., Chen, H.J., Wang, M.Y., 2011. Can. J. Vet. Res.
75, 122–127.
Letko, M., Marzi, A., Munster, V., 2020. Nat. Microbiol. 5, 562–569. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41564-020-0688-y.
Li, F., 2016. Annu. Rev. Virol. 3, 237–261. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-virology110615-042301.
Li, C., Ren, L., 2020. Transbound. Emerg. Dis. 67 (4), 1485–1491. https://doi.org/
10.1111/tbed.13620.
Li, F., Li, W., Farzan, M., Harrison, S.C., 2005. Science (80-. ) 309, 1864–1868. https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.1116480.
Lin, C.W., Lin, K.H., Hsieh, T.H., Shiu, S.Y., Li, J.Y., 2006. FEMS Immunol. Med.
Microbiol. 46, 375–380. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-695X.2006.00045.x.
Lu, R., Zhao, X., Li, J., Niu, P., Yang, B., Wu, H., Wang, W., Song, H., Huang, B., Zhu, N.,
Bi, Y., Ma, X., Zhan, F., Wang, L., Hu, T., Zhou, H., Hu, Z., Zhou, W., Zhao, L.,
Chen, J., Meng, Y., Wang, J., Lin, Y., Yuan, J., Xie, Z., Ma, J., Liu, W.J., Wang, D.,
Xu, W., Holmes, E.C., Gao, G.F., Wu, G., Chen, W., Shi, W., Tan, W., 2020. Lancet
395, 565–574. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30251-8.
Lv, H., Wu, N.C., Tak-Yin Tsang, O., Malik Peiris, J., Wilson, I.A., Mok, C.K., Yuan, M.,
APM Perera, R., Shing Leung, W., So, R.T., Man Chun Chan, J., Yip, G.K., Shiu Hong
Chik, T., Wang, Y., Yau Chung Choi, C., Lin, Y., Ng, W.W., Zhao, J., Poon, L.L., 2020.
Cell Rep. 31, 107725. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107725.
Maghdid, H.S., Ghafoor, K.Z., Sadiq, A.S., Curran, K., Rawat, D.B., Rabie, K., 2020.
Mao, K., Zhang, H., Yang, Z., 2020. Environ. Sci. Technol. 54 (7), 3733–3735. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c01174.
Mathuria, J.P., Yadav, R., Rajkumar, 2020. J. Infect. Public Health 13 (7), 901–905.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiph.2020.06.005.
Memish, Z.A., Mishra, N., Olival, K.J., Fagbo, S.F., Kapoor, V., Epstein, J.H.,
AlHakeem, R., Al Asmari, M., Islam, A., Kapoor, A., Briese, T., Daszak, P., Al
Rabeeah, A.A., Lipkin, W.I., 2013. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 19, 1819–1823. https://doi.
org/10.3201/eid1911.131172.
Mesa Biotechnology, 2020. https://www.mesabiotech.com/coronavirus. (Accessed 25
August 2020).
Miripour, Z.S., Sarrami-Forooshani, R., Sanati, H., Makarem, J., Taheri, M.S.,
Shojaeian, F., Eskafi, A.H., Abbasvandi, F., Namdar, N., Ghafari, H., Aghaee, P.,
Zandi, A., Faramarzpour, M., Hoseinyazdi, M., Tayebi, M., Abdolahad, M., 2020.
Biosens. Bioelectron. 165, 112435. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2020.112435.
Mohd, H.A., Al-Tawfiq, J.A., Memish, Z.A., 2016. Virol. J. 13 https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12985-016-0544-0.
Monteil, V., Kwon, H., Prado, P., Hagelkrüys, A., Wimmer, R.A., Stahl, M., Leopoldi, A.,
Garreta, E., Hurtado del Pozo, C., Prosper, F., Romero, J.P., Wirnsberger, G.,
Zhang, H., Slutsky, A.S., Conder, R., Montserrat, N., Mirazimi, A., Penninger, J.M.,
2020. Cell 181, 905–913. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.004 e7.
Mori, Y., Nagamine, K., Tomita, N., Notomi, T., 2001. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
289, 150–154. https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2001.5921.
Moudgil, A., Swaminathan, S., 2015. 2015 IEEE 10th International Conference on Nano/
Micro Engineered and Molecular Systems, NEMS 2015. Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers Inc., pp. 337–342. https://doi.org/10.1109/
NEMS.2015.7147439
Mount Sinai, 2020. https://www.mountsinai.org/about/newsroom/2020/mount-sinaisblood-test-to-detect-antibodies-to-covid19-receives-emergency-use-authorization-fro
m-us-food-and-drug-administration-pr. (Accessed 25 August 2020).
Nasseri, B., Soleimani, N., Rabiee, N., Kalbasi, A., Karimi, M., Hamblin, M.R., 2018.
Biosens. Bioelectron. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2018.05.050.
Notomi, T., Okayama, H., Masubuchi, H., Yonekawa, T., Watanabe, K., Amino, N.,
Hase, T., 2000. Nucleic Acids Res.
Pakdemirli, E., Mandalia, U., Monib, S., 2020. Cureus 12, e9942. https://doi.org/
10.7759/cureus.9942.
Pan, Y., Zhang, D., Yang, P., Poon, L.L.M., Wang, Q., 2020. Lancet Infect. Dis. 20 (4),
411–412. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30113-4.
Parida, M., Posadas, G., Inoue, S., Hasebe, F., Morita, K., 2004. J. Clin. Microbiol. 42,
257–263. https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.42.1.257-263.2004.
Peeling, R.W., Wedderburn, C.J., Garcia, P.J., Boeras, D., Fongwen, N., Nkengasong, J.,
Sall, A., Tanuri, A., Heymann, D.L., 2020. Lancet Infect. Dis. 20 (9), 245–249.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30517-X.
Perlman, S., 2020. N. Engl. J. Med. 382 (8), 760–762. https://doi.org/10.1056/
NEJMe2001126.
Pharmact, 2020. https://www.pharmact.eu/. (Accessed 14 June 2020).
Pohanka, M., 2017. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci 12, 496–506. https://doi.org/10.20964/
2017.01.44.

16

N. Taleghani and F. Taghipour

Biosensors and Bioelectronics 174 (2021) 112830
Whiting, P., Fficm, F., Singatullina, N., Edic, F., Rosser, J.H., 2015. Sheff. Teach. Hosp.
NHS Trust. https://doi.org/10.1093/bjaceaccp/mku063.
WHO, 2015. WHO.
WHO, 2020a.
WHO, 2020b. WHO.
WHO, 2020c. https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/who-director-general-s-openin
g-remarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19—11-march-2020. (Accessed 14 June
2020).
WHO, 2020d. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/antigen-detection-in-the-diag
nosis-of-sars-cov-2infection-using-rapid-immunoassays. (Accessed 11 July 2020).
Worldometer, 2020. Worldometer. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.23.20018549V2.
Xiang, J., Wen, J., Yuan, X., Xiong, S., Zhou4, X., Liu, C., Min, X., 2020a. https://doi.org/
10.1101/2020.03.19.20034447.
Xiang, J., Yan, M., Li, H., Liu, T., Lin, C., Huang, S., Shen, C., 2020b. . medRxiv
2020.02.27.20028787. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.27.20028787.
Xie, X., Zhong, Z., Zhao, W., Zheng, C., Wang, F., Liu, J., 2020. Radiology. https://doi.
org/10.1148/radiol.2020200343, 200343.
Xu, M., Wang, D., Wang, H., Zhang, X., Liang, T., Dai, J., Li, M., Zhang, J., Zhang, K.,
Xu, D., Yu, X., 2020. https://doi.org/10.1002/ctm2.158.
Yager, P., Edwards, T., Fu, E., Helton, K., Nelson, K., Tam, M.R., Weigl, B.H., 2006.
Nature. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05064.
Yang, Z., Xu, G., Reboud, J., Kasprzyk-Hordern, B., Cooper, J.M., 2017. Anal. Chem. 89,
9941–9945. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.7b02257.
Yang, Y., Yang, M., Shen, C., Wang, F., Yuan, J., Li, J., Zhang, M., Wang, Z., Xing, L., Wei,
J., Peng, L., Wong, G., Zheng, H., Wu, W., Liao, M., Feng, K., Li, J., Yang, Q., Zhao, J.,
Zhang, Z., Liu, L., Liu, Y., Yang, Y., Yang, M., Shen, C., Wang, F., Yuan, J., Li, J., Mm,
Z., Md, W., Mm, X., Mm, W., Peng, L., Mm, Z., Mm, W., Liao, M., Feng, M.K., Yang,
Q., Zhao, J., Phd, Z., Liu, Y., 2020. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.11.20021493.
Zaki, A.M., van Boheemen, S., Bestebroer, T.M., Osterhaus, A.D.M.E., Fouchier, R.A.M.,
2012. N. Engl. J. Med. 367, 1814–1820. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1211721.
Zhang, W., Du, R.H., Li, B., Zheng, X.S., Yang, X. Lou, Hu, B., Wang, Y.Y., Xiao, G.F.,
Yan, B., Shi, Z.L., Zhou, P., 2020. Emerg. Microb. Infect. 9, 386–389. https://doi.
org/10.1080/22221751.2020.1729071.
Zhang, F., Abudayyeh, O.O., Gootenberg, J.S., 2020..
Zhou, X., Liu, D., Zhong, R., Dai, Z., Wu, D., Wang, H., Du, Y., Xia, Z., Zhang, L., Mei, X.,
Lin, B., 2004. Electrophoresis 25, 3032–3039. https://doi.org/10.1002/
elps.200305966.
Zhou, P., Yang, X.L., Wang, X.G., Hu, B., Zhang, L., Zhang, W., Si, H.R., Zhu, Y., Li, B.,
Huang, C.L., Chen, H.D., Chen, J., Luo, Y., Guo, H., Jiang, R.D., Liu, M.Q., Chen, Y.,
Shen, X.R., Wang, X., Zheng, X.S., Zhao, K., Chen, Q.J., Deng, F., Liu, L.L., Yan, B.,
Zhan, F.X., Wang, Y.Y., Xiao, G.F., Shi, Z.L., 2020. Nature 579, 270–273. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41586-020-2012-7.
Zhu, X., Wang, X., Han, L., Chen, T., Wang, L., Li, H., Li, S., He, L., Fu, X., Chen, S.,
Mei, X., Chen, H., Wang, Y., 2020. Biosens. Bioelectron. 166. https://doi.org/10.10
16/j.bios.2020.112437.
Zuo, B., Li, S., Guo, Z., Zhang, J., Chen, C., 2004. Anal. Chem. 76, 3536–3540. https://
doi.org/10.1021/ac035367b.

Qiu, G., Gai, Z., Tao, Y., Schmitt, J., Kullak-Ublick, G.A., Wang, J., 2020. ACS Nano 14,
5268–5277. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.0c02439.
FDA, 2020. https://www.quidel.com/immunoassays/rapid-sars-tests/sofia-sars-antigen
-fia, 2020s , 14 June 2020.
Raeiszadeh, M., Adeli, B., 2020. ACS Photonics. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsphotonics.0c01245.
RayBiotech, 2020. https://raybiotech.com/learning-center/iga-antibody-detection-incovid-19/. (Accessed 5 November 2020).
Reboud, J., Xu, G., Garrett, A., Adriko, M., Yang, Z., Tukahebwa, E.M., Rowell, C.,
Cooper, J.M., 2019. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 116, 4834–4842. https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.1812296116.
Reusken, C.B.E.M., Haagmans, B.L., Müller, M.A., Gutierrez, C., Godeke, G.J., Meyer, B.,
Muth, D., Raj, V.S., Vries, L.S. De, Corman, V.M., Drexler, J.F., Smits, S.L., El
Tahir, Y.E., De Sousa, R., van Beek, J., Nowotny, N., van Maanen, K., HidalgoHermoso, E., Bosch, B.J., Rottier, P., Osterhaus, A., Gortázar-Schmidt, C.,
Drosten, C., Koopmans, M.P.G., 2013. Lancet Infect. Dis. 13, 859–866. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S1473-3099(13)70164-6.
Roda, A., Cavalera, S., Di Nardo, F., Calabria, D., Rosati, S., Simoni, P., Colitti, B.,
Baggiani, C., Roda, M., Anfossi, L., 2021. Biosens. Bioelectron. 172, 112765. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2020.112765.
Schiaffino, S., Tritella, S., Cozzi, A., Carriero, S., Blandi, L., Ferraris, L., Sardanelli, F.,
2020. J. Thorac. Imag. 35, W105–W106. https://doi.org/10.1097/
RTI.0000000000000533.
Seasun Biomaterials, 2020. https://www.fda.gov/media/138307/download. (Accessed
25 August 2020).
Seo, G., Lee, G., Kim, M.J., Baek, S.-H., Choi, M., Ku, B., Lee, C.-S., Jun, S., Park, D.,
Kim, H.G., Kim, S.-J., Lee, J.-O., Kim, T., Changkyun Park, E., Kim, S., 2020. Il ACS
Nano 14, 5142. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.0c02823.
Shang, J., Wan, Y., Luo, C., Ye, G., Geng, Q., Auerbach, A., Li, F., 2020. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 117, 11727–11734. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2003138117.
Stobiecka, M., Chalupa, A., Dworakowska, B., 2016. Biosens. Bioelectron. 84, 37–43.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2015.10.041.
Stobiecka, M., Jakiela, S., Chalupa, A., Bednarczyk, P., Dworakowska, B., 2017. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 88, 114–121. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2016.07.110.
Udugama, B., Kadhiresan, P., Kozlowski, H.N., Malekjahani, A., Osborne, M., Li, V.Y.C.,
Chen, H., Mubareka, S., Gubbay, J.B., Chan, W.C.W., 2020. ACS Nano 14,
3822–3835. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.0c02624.
University, T., 2020. https://www.biospace.com/article/releases/beroni-group-collabor
ates-with-tianjin-university-to-develop-novel-solution-for-coronavirus-covid-19-/.
(Accessed 14 June 2020).
Viracor Eurofins, 2020. https://www.viracor-eurofins.com/about-us/newsroom/news-it
ems/viracor-eurofins-launches-coronavirus-sars-cov-2-rt-pcr-test-with-same-day-r
esults-12-18-hours/. (Accessed 14 June 2020).
Wang, L., Wong, A., 2020. . undefined.
Wang, J.H., Wang, C.H., Ling, W.S., Jheng, L., Wang, S.W., Lee, G. Bin, 2012.
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical
Systems (MEMS), pp. 961–964. https://doi.org/10.1109/MEMSYS.2012.6170346.

17

