Pathology - Research and Practice 224 (2021) 153384

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Pathology - Research and Practice
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/prp

Review

Covid19, beyond just the lungs: A review of multisystemic involvement
by Covid19
Anam Singh, Sufian Zaheer *, Naveen Kumar, Tanisha Singla, Sunil Ranga
Vardhman Mahavir Medical College and Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi, India

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
COVID19
Multi-systemic
Lungs
Diffuse alveolar damage

With the commencement of the COVID19 pandemic, following its 1st case reported in Wuhan in China, the
knowledge about the virus as well as the symptoms produced by the disease have drastically increased to this
day. The manifestations of COVID19 is now known to affect multiple organ systems of the body, which have
shown to have acute as well as chronic complications. Histopathological analysis of the biopsies from the affected
organs have implied a direct cytopathic effect of the virus but at the same time not ruling out other causes like
hypoxia metabolic changes etc., occurring during the course of the disease. In this review article, we have
highlighted the histopathological changes in various organs as reported by various studies throughout the world
for a better understanding of the etiopathogenesis of COVID19.

1. Introduction
COVID19 has now, since its 1st case in December has been seen to
show widespread and multisystemic manifestations [1].
. The disease is not just confined to the lungs, but with the spillage of
the virus into the blood stream has lead to the involvement of almost all
the organs of the body [2], including heart, liver, brain, kidney, skin,
intestines and eyes. The multisystemic involvement can mainly be
attributed to the widespread localization of the ACE2 receptors
throughout the body, which acts as the major entry point for the virus
[3]. The histo-pathological findings in various organs apart from the
clinical symptoms and biochemical markers can provide major clue to­
wards the pathogenesis of the disease.
2. Material and methods
We carried out systemic online search from databases with
‘COVID19’ and ‘Coronavirus’ as the keywords. The articles were taken
mainly from PubMed, PMC, Embase, Cochrane library, Google Scholar,
MEDLINE, UpToDate, and Web of Science databases. Articles were
selected highlighting the systemic manifestations of the disease. The
publication ranged from a period of 01 Jan 2020 to 20 July 2020.
All the publications screened and selected were carefully reviewed
and analysed by two independent investigators. All the articles were

studied in full text reviews. All studies not reporting original date and
irrelevant data were excluded from this review.
3. The site of most action, lungs
The lungs by far, had been considered as the hotspot and are known
to act as a niche for the proliferation of the virus. The residence of the
virus in the lungs also is the main reason for the rapid transmission of the
disease [4]. According to various studies published, the novel corona­
virus enters by binding to ACE2 receptors present on the target cells
through the Receptor Binding Domain (RBD) which is located on the
viral particles [5].
In case of pulmonary involvement, the histological patterns vary
from interstitial inflammation, diffuse alveolar damage (DAD), and
necrotizing bronchitis/ bronchiolitis. By far the most common pattern
observed is bilateral DAD [6]. In a case study by H. Zhang et al. (2020),
the pulmonary biopsy of a 72-year-old diabetic male showed all the
characteristic features of diffuse alveolar damage, which included
presence of intra-alveolar fibrinous exudates, along with loose intersti­
tial fibrosis. Chronic inflammatory infiltrates in the form of macrophages
and lymphocytes (mainly CD4‑positive T cells) were also predominantly
observed. Denuded alveolar lining cells with reactive type II pneumo­
cyte hyperplasia, intra-alveolar loose fibrous plugs of organizing pneu­
monia were also present. The same study also showed immunostaining

* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: dewdropanam@gmail.com (A. Singh), sufianzaheer@gmil.com (S. Zaheer), drnaveen08@gmail.com (N. Kumar), tanishasingla7@gmail.com
(T. Singla), sunilran18@yahoo.co.in (S. Ranga).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prp.2021.153384
Received 10 January 2021; Received in revised form 11 February 2021; Accepted 12 February 2021
Available online 16 February 2021
0344-0338/© 2021 Published by Elsevier GmbH.

A. Singh et al.

Pathology - Research and Practice 224 (2021) 153384

throughout the world. The most commonly affected levels include,
abnormal alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotrans­
ferase (AST) levels and also mildly raised total bilirubin (TB) levels.
Yafei Zhang et al., in their study compared various liver function indices
of patients with COVID19 with patients suffering from community ac­
quired pneumonia (CAP). However, they found that the liver enzymes
levels were not significantly different between the two groups. It was
found that 9.57 % and 14.78 % of the 115 cases with COVID19 showed
elevated ALT and AST respectively, which was almost comparable to the
11.4 %(ALT) and 21.92 %(AST) of 114 cases with CAP. In contrast, it
was observed in their study that there was a significant elevation in the
liver enzymes in severe cases compared to the mild ones [18]. On the
other hand, another study when compared patients with anormal liver
function to patients with normal liver function, found that the elevated
ALT levels may be attributable to drinking history. However, they found
that C- reactive protein (CRP) ≥20 mg/L and lymphocyte count< 1.1 ×
109/L were independently related to the ALT elevation, indicative of
hepatic injury suggesting an inflammatory cytokine storm [19].
On the other hand, the histological evaluation in most of the liver
biopsies has mainly shown non-specific findings. Yafei Zhang et al.,
evaluated the liver biopsy of one of the autopsy cases and found mild
sinusoidal dilatation with minimal lymphocytic infiltration in the liver
tissue [18]. Similarly, another evaluation of liver biopsies in Beijing
showed moderate micro-vesicular steatosis and active inflammation in
the hepatic lobule portal area. But whether these findings were drug
induced (since the patients received lopinavir/ritonavir treatment) or
due to COVID19 infection, could not be concluded [10].
Another study which evaluated the microscopic histological changes
in 04 cases, observed sinusoidal dilatation with nuclear glycogen accu­
mulation in hepatocytes, focal macro-vesicular steatosis along with
dense atypical small lymphocytes infiltrating the portal tracts in case 1
(patient being a known case of CLL). The 2nd case showed features of
cirrhosis consistent with his history and, mild zone 3 sinusoidal dilata­
tion along with only mild lobular lymphocytic infiltration in case 3 and 4
[20].
So, owing to the small sample size in most of the studies, whether the
changes in the liver depict direct hepatic injury by the infection or drug
induced changes [10] (owing to antivirals, antibiotics, traditional Chi­
nese medicine, antipyretics and analgesics) or inflammatory cytokine
storm or merely due to hypoxemia [18,19], still lies in its preliminary
stage. However, at the same time, it can also be postulated that maybe
all these mechanisms might be working hand in hand to bring about
these changes.

by rabbit polyclonal antibody, Rp3 NP on the lung sections, highlighting
the alveolar epithelial cells. Positive immunostaining could also be
appreciated in the damaged and desquamated cells found within the
alveolar space [7] (Table 1).
However, the other rare histological pattern which is being high­
lighted is acute fibrinous and organizing pneumonia (AFOP) in patients
with COVID19 disease. This pattern was described in a short letter
highlighting the autopsy findings in 06 French patients [8] and even
earlier by Beasley et al. [9] in 2002, where it was first described. Out of
these, 05 patients’ pulmonary histological examination showed depo­
sition of extensive intra-alveolar “fibrin balls” (Table 1). They lacked the
characteristic hyaline membranes and instead showed intra-luminal
loose connective tissue within alveolar ducts and bronchioles (orga­
nizing pneumonia). Fibroblastic bodies and fibroblasts surrounding
intra-alveolar fibrin along with evidence of vascular injury was also a
prominent feature [8]. So, whether AFOP can be described as a histo­
logical pattern of COVID19 lung disease associated with a more
aggressive course (due to its obliterative pattern), still needs to be
studied further.
Xu Z et al., also described the presence of multi-nucleated syncytial
cells with atypical enlarged pneumocyte. These cells showed a large
nuclei, amphophilic granular cytoplasm, and prominent nucleoli which
were suggestive of viral cytopathic changes [10]. Also observed were the
presence of focal inflammatory infiltrate in the form of neutrophils,
possibly due to secondary infection. The neutrophils, however, observed
by Sharon E. Fox et al., in their autopsy findings were partially degen­
erated and were found to be entrapped in fibres, possibly depicting
neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) [11]. In a perspective, based on
review of literature of autopsy results, suggested that NETs, although not
very commonly seen in COVID19 disease may have a role in organ
damage and increased mortality in COVID19 patients. This may be
based on the association of COVID19 with excessive thrombus formation
and cytokine storm [12]. However, this hypothesis needs to be proven
further.
Tina Schaller et al. in 2020, performed post-mortem examination of
10 patients with other co-morbid conditions (including cardiovascular
disease, obesity, pre-exiting lung damage, leukemias and thyroid con­
ditions) who succumbed to COVID19, showed similar results of
disseminated DAD as being the most common histological pattern. DAD
was observed to be present in different stages of the disease, with
heterogenous distribution and being more pronounced in the middle and
lower lobes of the lung. They also postulated that the histological fea­
tures observed in COVID19 infection has close resemblance to other
Beta-coronavirus infections which includes Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome [13], which also
showed DAD to be the main feature with varying degrees of edema,
organization, hyaline membrane and fibrosis [14,15].
The broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) sample analysed of a 66-year-old
male, who presented with a short history of fever and fatigue, on cyto­
morphological examination showed the presence of scattered alveolar
macrophages with fibrino-hematic material. It also showed presence of
abundant CD138 positive plasma cells, with few showing plasmablastic
features. Few T and B lymphocytes were also seen. The scattered mac­
rophages, occasionally showed nuclear clearing and also intranuclear
cytopathic inclusions attributable to SARS-CoV-2 infection. This case
report highlighted the abundance of plasma cells in BAL specimens [16].

5. Kidney: the newest organ of interest
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is now well established in patients with
COVID19. The spread of the virus from the site of lung involvement, into
the circulation with its further spread into the kidney seems to be the
likely route [21]. The ACE2 receptor being widely distributed
throughout the body is also seen to be present on the proximal tubules of
the kidney at the brush border apical membrane. Studies have also
shown their presence on the podocytes, which may act as the site of
invasion by the viral particles [22].
Various studies have shown renal involvement by COVID19 infec­
tion, of which Yachun Chang et al., observed high prevalence of kidney
disease in patients hospitalized with COVID19 in the form of raised
serum creatinine in approximately 40 % of the cases. They tried to
associate kidney involvement of these cases with the patient outcome,
and observed that patients with increased serum creatinine levels were
more likely to have ICU admissions. They highlighted the role of kidney
function tests and advocated its use for prognostication even in patients
presenting with mild form of respiratory symptoms [21].
Although slightly lacking, the histopathological features of the kid­
ney with COVID19 has been observed to show renal involvement. On
tissue examination, a diverse spectrum of features were observed by Hua

4. Liver, features being comparatively non-specific
COVID 19, although having its nidus in the lungs has now been seen
to show widespread manifestations. (Fig. 1) Many studies have been
conducted to study the extent of liver involvement by COVID19, owing
to the presence of ACE2 receptors not only on the hepatocytes but also
on the intra-hepatic bile duct [17].
The liver, being involved and getting affected can mainly be depicted
by the deranged liver biochemical profile, as shown by various studies
2

Authors,
Country

Aim of study

No. of
cases
studied

Clinical features & Radiological details

Biomarkers &
Haematological findings

Histopathology & Cytomorphology

IHC/Immuno-floroscence

Zhang H et al,
China

Histo-pathological
findings and IHC in
COVID19 infected lung

01

C/F: 72-year-old diabetic & hypertensive
presented with fever & cough.

–

DAD, intra-alveolar fibrinous exudates &
loose interstitial fibrosis.

Rp3 NP protein of
–
SARS–CoV-2: prominent
expression on alveolar
epithelial cells & on damaged
desquamated cells within
alveolar space.

–

-01 case: Lymphocytic viral pneumonia

–

–

Peripheral blood flow
cytometry:

-05 cases: AFOP with intra-alveolar “fibrin
balls”
LUNGS:
-B/L DAD, cellular fibro-myxoid exudate.

–

–

–

–

–

–

-Minor neutrophilic infiltration in 5 cases
HEART:
-Mild lymphocytic myocarditis (04 cases) &
epicarditis (02 cases)
LIVER:
-Non-specific Periportal liver lymphocyte
infiltration & fibrosis
BRAIN:
-No change
CYTOMORPHOLOGY:
–

–

Copin MC et
al, France

Histological patterns of
lung injury

06

Xu Z et al,
China

Pathological findings of
COVID-19 associated with
acute respiratory distress
syndrome

01

CT scan: Patchy ground glass–like
opacifications with pleural thickening and
mediastinal lymphadenopathy.
–

Chest X-ray: Multiple patchy shadows in B/L
lungs

- Reduced CD4 & CD8 T
cells

3
Autopsy series studying
pulmonary and cardiac
Pathology in Covid19.

04

Schaller T et
al, Germany

Postmortem Examination
10
of Patients With COVID-19

C/F: Aged 44− 78 years with hypertension
-Mild cough & fever with sudden respiratory
decompensation

C/F: Fever, cough & dyspnea.
X ray: (09 cases) ground-glass opacity
predominantly in middle & lower lung fields.

Giani M et al,
Italy

BAL fluid analysis

01

-Viral cytopathic effect: multinucleated
syncytial cells with atypical enlarged
pneumocytes in intra-alveolar spaces.
HEART:
-Interstitial mononuclear inflammatory
infiltrates
LIVER:
-Moderate microvesicular steatosis with
mild lobular & portal activity

-LUNGS: (04 cases)
-Bilateral DAD, mild-to-moderate
lymphocytic infiltrate, megakaryocytes
within small vessels & alveolar capillaries.
-Increased AST
-Viral cytopathic effect: cytomegaly
enlarged nuclei & bright, eosinophilic
nucleoli within alveolar spaces.
-Increased D-dimer levels HEART: (04 cases)
in all patients near death. -Scattered individual cell myocyte necrosis.
–
LUNGS: (10 cases)
-Disseminated DAD at different stages more
pronounced in middle & lower lobes.
-Fully established fibrosis in 01 case.

C/F: Fatigue & fever progressing to respiratory –
distress & hypoxia

(continued on next page)

Pathology - Research and Practice 224 (2021) 153384

Fox SE et al,
USA

- High proportions of
HLA-DR (CD4 3⋅47 %) &
CD38 (CD8 39⋅4%)
double-positive fractions
- Increased concentration
of highly
proinflammatory CCR6+
Th17 in CD4 T cells
-Elevated ferritin &
fibrinogen levels

Electron microscopy

A. Singh et al.

Table 1
Table enlisting various studies on COVID19, highlighting the radiological and pathological aspects of the disease in multiple systems of the body.

Authors,
Country

Zhang Y et al,
China

Tian S et al,
China

Aim of study

Assess liver impairment in
COVID19 patients

No. of
cases
studied

115

Clinical features & Radiological details

C/F: Respiratory distress

Biomarkers &
Haematological findings

Elevated levels of:
-ALT: 11/115

Pathological assessment of 04
postmortem core biopsies,

C/F: Aged 59− 81 years with each patient
having at least one underlying disease,
including immunocompromised status.

Histopathology & Cytomorphology

-Fibrino-hematic material with scattered
alveolar macrophages & predominance of
activated plasma cells (CD138+), admixed
with T & scattered B lymphocytes.
-Alveolar macrophages: showed nuclear
clearing or intranuclear cytopathic
inclusions
LIVER: (01 case)
-Non-specific findings.
-Mild sinusoidal dilatation with minimal
lymphocytic infiltration

-AST: 17/115
-S.biliubin: 08/115 cases.
Case 1: -elevated pro-BNP LUNGS:
& hypertensive cardiac
troponin (d/t history of
previous MI)
- DAD (in all 04 cases)

IHC/Immuno-floroscence

Electron microscopy

–

–

–

–

DIF:Nonspecific IgM & C3
trapping in glomeruli.

Coronavirus-like particles:

Indirect IF: Positive
granular nuclear and
cytoplasmic staining with
SARS-CoV nucleoprotein in
tubular epithelium (in 03 out
of 06 cases)

65− 136 nm, with distinctive
spikes, 20 − 25 nm in
cytoplasm of renal proximal
tubular epithelium/
podocytes /less so in distal
tubules.

A. Singh et al.

Table 1 (continued )

CT scan (03 cases): Multiple patchy ground
glass opacities
X ray (01 case): Patchy high-density shadows All 04 cases:
with worsening in subsequent days.

4
Histopathological analysis
of kidney biopsy in 26
postmortem cases.

26

− 3 cases: pigmented casts with high levels of
CPK possibly due to rhabdomyolysis
− 5 cases:Endothelial cell swelling with
variable foamy degeneration in old/
hypertensive/diabetic cases.

(continued on next page)

Pathology - Research and Practice 224 (2021) 153384

Su H et al,
China.

- Case no. 02: also showed pneumocyte
injury with focal sloughing & formation of
syncytial giant cells
-Normal AST/ALT/S.
-Case no. 04: also showed fibrinoid necrosis
bilirubin levels
in small vessels with abundant intra-alveolar
neutrophilic infiltration, consistent with
bronchopneumonia due to superimposed
bacterial infection.
LIVER:
-Case 1: sinusoidal dilatation, nuclear
glycogen in hepatocytes, focal
macrovesicular steatosis and features of CLL
-Case 2: cirrhosis consistent with his history
& mild zone 3 sinusoidal dilatation
-Case 3&4: mild lobular lymphocytic
infiltration.
HEART:
-Non-specific findings with no epicardial/
myocardial inflammation.
C/F: 26 cases died of respiratory failure due to - Leukocytois in 10 cases. -Prominent ATI
COVID19
-Loss of brush border, vacuolar degeneration
& dilatation of tubular lumen with cellular
debris in almost all cases,
− 2 cases: multiple foci of bacteria & diffuse
polymorphonuclear casts in tubular lumen.

Authors,
Country

Aim of study

No. of
cases
studied

Clinical features & Radiological details

Christopher P.
Larsen et al,
USA

Collapsing
Glomerulopathy in a
Patient With COVID-19

01

C/F: 63-year-old hypertensive male with
fatigue, high-grade fever (39.7

Buja LM et al,
USA

Emerging spectrum of
cardiopulmonary
pathology of COVID-19:

03

C/F: Autopsy done on: Case 1: 62-year-old
obese male history of respiratory illness died of
COVID19 Case 2: 34-year-old obese, diabetic
hypertensive with headache, shortness of
breath & productive cough died of COVID19
Case 3: 48-year-old obese died of COVID19
CT scan: (Case 2) B/L upper & lower lobe
ground-glass with early consolidative alveolar
opacities of rounded morphology.

Biomarkers &
Haematological findings

Histopathology & Cytomorphology

− 3 cases: segmental fibrin thrombus in
glomerular capillary loops with severe
injury of the endothelium Occasional
podocyte vacuolation & detachment from
the glomerular basement membrane.
-Elevated CRP & D-dimer Kidney Biopsy:
− 14 glomeruli were globally sclerotic. Many
of the intact glomeruli showed tuft collapse
with overlying epithelial hypertrophy &
hyperplasia in the Bowman space.
-Lymphopenia
-Tubular epithelium injury: most prominent
in the PCT
-Interstitial fibrosis, tubular atrophy,
inflammatory infiltrate in interstitium
consisting of lymphocytes, plasma cells with
few scattered eosinophils
–
LUNGS:

5

-Case 1: early DAD with multiple hyaline
membranes & focal mild inflammation with
lymphocytes & macrophages in some
alveolar spaces.

Electron microscopy

DIF: Negative for IgA, IgG,
IgM, C3, C1q, kappa &
lambda in Glomeruli.

No definitive viral particles

–

Case 1:

-Strands of precipitated
fibrin & entrapped
neutrophils within alveolar
capillaries -Larger deposits
of fibrin in alveolar spaces.
-No Viral particles in heart or
lungs.

(continued on next page)

Pathology - Research and Practice 224 (2021) 153384

-Case 2:interstitial lymphocytic pneumonitis
with lymphocytic infiltrates around small
blood vessels & terminal bronchioles.
Microthrombi in some pulmonary arterioles.
-Case 3: right pleura showed empyema.
Right lung showed evidence of atelectasis &
DAD. DAD was more pronounced in the
expanded left lung.
LIVER:
-Case 1 & 2: Moderate macrovesicular
steatosis
-Case 3: Moderate macrovesicular steatosis,
lympho-plasmacytic triaditis with portal
fibrosis and early portal-portal bridging
fibrosis.
HEART:
-Case 1: Cardiomyocytes with moderately
enlarged hyperchromatic nuclei with
vacuolar degenerative change. No
myocarditis.
-Case 2: Individual damaged cardiomyocytes
-Case 3: Multifocal lymphocytic infiltrates in
epicardium. Myocytes: enlarged
hyperchromatic nuclei, changes of acute
injury.

IHC/Immuno-floroscence

A. Singh et al.

Table 1 (continued )

Authors,
Country

Tavazzi G et
al, Italy

Varga Z et al,
Switzerland.

Aim of study

Myocardial localization of
coronavirus in COVID-19
cardiogenic shock

Endothelial cell infection
and endotheliitis in
COVID-19

No. of
cases
studied

01

03

Clinical features & Radiological details

C/F: 69-year-old patient with flu-like
symptoms rapidly degenerating into
respiratory distress, hypotension & shock.

C/F: Autopsies done on: Hypertensive males
with COVID19 disease developing multi-organ
failure

Biomarkers &
Haematological findings

-Lymphopenia

-Raised CRP
- Increased hs-TnI
–

6
Von Weyhern
C.H., et al,
Germany

06

Neuropathological
Features of Covid-19

18

C/F: Autopsies of 06 case aged 58− 82 years
who died from COVID-19

-Elevated CRP & IL-6 in
all the cases
-Leukocytosis in 2 cases

A spectrum of vascular and
Reichard RR et acute disseminated
01
al, USA
encephalomyelitis
(ADEM)-like pathology

C/F: Myalgia headache & decreased taste

C/F: 71-year-old male with fatigue and
exertional dyspnea,
CT Chest: Parenchymal consolidation and
surrounding ground-glass opacities following a
peri-broncho vascular distribution.

–

Elevated CRP, IL-6 &
ferritin levels

IHC/Immuno-floroscence

KIDNEY:
-Case 1: Hyaline arteriolosclerosis with
glomerulosclerosis
-Case 2: Occasional fibrin-platelet thrombus
in renal glomerular capillaries.
-Case 3: Mild hyaline arteriolosclerosis,
periglomerular hyaline arteriolosclerosis
with rare holo-sclerotic glomeruli.
HEART:
Immune-light microscopy:
-Cardiac myocytes showed non-specific
Large (>20 μm), vacuolated,
features consisting of focal myofibrillar lysis, CD68-positive macrophages
and lipid droplets.

-Case 1: Inflammatory cells associated with –
endothelium & apoptotic bodies in heart,
small bowel & lungs
-Case 2: Lymphocytic endotheliitis in lung,
heart, kidney, and liver with liver cell
necrosis. No lymphocytic myocarditis.
-Case 3: Small intestine resection showed
prominent endotheliitis of the submucosal
vessels with apoptotic bodies
BRAIN:

All cases:-Lymphocytic pan-encephalitis &
meningitis
-Patients with age <65yrs: Death due to
Petechial bleeding and intracranial
hemmorhage.
LUNGS:
− 05 cases: DOD
=01 case: Organizing Pneumonia Pattern
-All cases:Acute hypoxic injury in cerebrum
& cerebellum with loss of neurons in the
cerebral cortex, hippocampus & cerebellar
Purkinje cell layer. No thrombi/vasculitis.
− 02 cases: perivascular lymphocytes
− 01 case: focal leptomeningeal
inflammation
-Perivascular acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis (ADEM)-like pathology:
Foci of intraparenchymal blood that
disrupted the white matter, with
macrophages at periphery of the lesions

Electron microscopy

Single / small groups of viral
particles with electron-dense
spike-like structures & size
between 70–120 nm within
the interstitial cells of
myocardium.
Case 1: In transplanted
kidney- Viral inclusion
structures (dense circular
surface with lucid centre) in
endothelial cells

–

–

IHC to detect SARS-CoV:

–

Negative in neurons, glia,
endothelium& immune cells.

–

–

- Luxol fast blue: loss of myelin,
(continued on next page)

Pathology - Research and Practice 224 (2021) 153384

Solomon IH et
al, England

Early evidence of
pronounced brain
involvement in fatal
COVID-19

Histopathology & Cytomorphology

A. Singh et al.

Table 1 (continued )

Authors,
Country

Aim of study

No. of
cases
studied

Clinical features & Radiological details

Biomarkers &
Haematological findings

Histopathology & Cytomorphology

Poyiadji N et
al, USA

COVID-19–associated
Acute Hemorrhagic
Necrotizing
Encephalopathy

01

C/F: 58-year-old female with 3-day history of
cough, fever & altered mental status.

–

–

Classification of the
cutaneous manifestations
of COVID -19

375

NC-CT head: Symmetric hypoattenuation
within the bilateral medial thalami.
MRI: Haemorrhagic rim enhancing lesions
within the bilateral thalami, medial temporal
lobes & subinsular regions
C/F:

–

–

–

–

18

-Pseudo-chilbain: 71cases
-Vesicular: 34
-Urticarial: 73
-Maculo-papular: 176
-Livedo/ necrosis: 21
C/F:

–

–

–

–

-Varicella-like papulovesicular exanthem
showing:Basket-wave hyperkeratosis,
slightly atrophic epidermis, vacuolar
degeneration of the basal layer with
multinucleate, hyperchromatic
keratinocytes & dyskeratotic cells
− 02 cases: Grover & Kaposi’s varicelliform
eruption- dyskeratotic cells, ballooning
multinucleated cells, sparse necrotic
keratinocytes with lymphocytic satellitosis.
− 3rd case:Perivascular spongiotic
dermatitis with exocytosis with a large nest
of Langerhans cells, dense perivascular
lymphocytic infiltration with eosinophils
around the swollen blood vessels.
− 4th case: Papular erythematous exanthema
-edematous dermis with abundant
eosinophils & lymphocytic vasculitis
− 5th case: severe maular haemorrhagic rash
d/t fintravascular microthrombi within the
small dermal vessels
Endoscopic biopsy: (01 case):
-Lympho-plasmacytic infiltration along with
interstitial edema in the lamina propria of
stomach, duodenum, & rectum

–

–

–

–

Galvan et al,
Spain

Recalcati et al, Cutaneous manifestations
Spain
in COVID-19: a first
perspective

out of 88
cases
-Skin
lesions

7
Marzano AV,
Italy

Varicella-like exanthem as
a specific COVID19–associated skin
manifestation

Gianotti R et
al, Italy

Clinical &
05
histopathological study of
skin dermatoses in patients
with COVID-19

Evidence for
Gastrointestinal Infection
of SARS-CoV-2

73

Electron microscopy

–

-Erythematous rash: 14

-Urticaria: 03 -Chickenpox-like vesicles :01
case
C/F: Fever, cough headache, weakness, coryza –
dyspnea, hyposmia, hypogeusia,
pharyngodynia, myalgia with skin lesions

C/F: Fever, sore throat & cough with
development of skin lesions during hospital
stay.

–

C/F: 73-year-old hospitalized patients infected
–
with COVID19

-Occasional lymphocytes in esophageal
squamous epithelium

-ACE2: Rarely expressed on
esophageal epithelium
-abundantly distributed on
cilia of glandular epithelia.
-Viral nucleocapsid
protein: cytoplasm of
gastric, duodenal & rectum

–

(continued on next page)

Pathology - Research and Practice 224 (2021) 153384

Xiao F et al,
China

22

IHC/Immuno-floroscence

A. Singh et al.

Table 1 (continued )

Authors,
Country

Aim of study

No. of
cases
studied

Carvalho A et
al, USA

Gastrointestinal Infection
Causing Hemorrhagic
Colitis in COVID 19

01

Yang M et al,
China

Pathological Findings in
the Testes of COVID-19

12

Clinical features & Radiological details

Biomarkers &
Haematological findings

C/F: 71-year-old hypertensive female with
Leukocytosis with
nausea, vomiting, anorexia, diffuse abdominal neutrophilia
pain & distention
CE-CT abdomen: Severe colonic
inflammation, most pronounced in ascending,
transverse & descending colon
C/F: Postmortem examination of the testes
–
from 12 COVID-19 patients

Histopathology & Cytomorphology

Edema in lamina propria with intact crypts
with no colitis/ischemia/ or inflammatory
bowel disease.

-Sertoli cells showed swelling, vacuolation &
cytoplasmic rarefaction, detachment from
tubular basement membranes, loss and
sloughing into lumens of the intratubular
cell mass seen in all cases
-Classified injury to seminiferous tubules
(ST) as:
Mild – 02 cases
Moderate – 05

Brancatella A
et al, Italy

Subacute Thyroiditis After
Sars-COV-2 Infection

01

C/F: 8-year-old female with fever, neck pain
radiating to the jaw & palpitations

8

USG neck: Bilateral and diffuse hypoechoic
areas
Wei L et al,
China

Pathology of the thyroid in 05
severe acute respiratory
syndrome

C/F: 05 autopsy cases who initially presented
with fever and shortness of breath

-Elevated free thyroxine
& free triiodothyronine
levels
-High inflammatory
markers
-Leukocytosis on
peripheral smear
Lymphopenia on
peripheral smear

Severe - 04

Electron microscopy

glandular epithelial cell, but
not in esophageal
epithelium.
–

–

ACE2:

No viral particles in all 03
cases tested

-Diffuse expression on Sertoli
cells.
-Strongly expressed on
Leydig cells.
-No expression on
spermatogonia.

–

–

All cases:

Apoptosis with TUNEL assay: –
apoptosis was observed in
both the follicular epithelium
and the interfollicular region
of all patients with SARS

–

Pathology - Research and Practice 224 (2021) 153384

-Destruction of the follicular epithelium and
exfoliation of epithelial cells into the follicle.
-Follicles: dilated/ collapsed/distorted with
an irregular outline/ microfollicle
configuration.
− 01 case: congested with severe damage in
follicular epithelium.

KEY:
DAD - Diffuse alveolar damage.
AFOP -Acute fibrinous and organizing pneumonia.
B/L - bilateral.
AKI - Acute Kidney injury.
C/F - clinical features.
CRP - C-reactive protein.
IL-6 - Interleukin 6.
hs-TnI - Troponin I.

IHC/Immuno-floroscence

A. Singh et al.

Table 1 (continued )

A. Singh et al.

Pathology - Research and Practice 224 (2021) 153384

Like in the kidney and liver, the cardiac involvement can be depicted
by various elevated bio-markers, which increase in case of myocardial
injury. Troponin I and Troponin T appear to be the biomarkers of in­
terest. Various studies have evaluated that increased Troponin I and
Troponin T levels are associated with higher mortality among COVID19
patients and are mostly seen in older comorbid patients [27,28]. It was
observed by Yishay Szekely et al., that higher troponin levels were
associated with higher left atrial pressure and also decreased left ven­
tricular diastolic function [29]. Other markers which have shown
increased mortality include Interleukin-6, D-dimer, Lactate dehydroge­
nase (LDH), Ferritin, which in contrary to Troponins suggest inflam­
matory cytokine storm, rather than direct myocardial damage as a
mechanism for cardiac injury [30].
The autopsy histo-pathological examination of the heart in most of
the studies have shown minimal to negligent direct viral cytopathic
changes on the myocytes. An autopsy series performed in the United
States, highlighted the same and observed only scattered individual
myocyte necrosis with no evidence of extensive necrotic areas. They
found no evidence of massive lymphocytic infiltration, which is nor­
mally seen in viral myocarditis. At the same time most of the cases,
grossly only showed cardiomegaly with right ventricular dilatation,
mostly owing to pulmonary involvement by the virus [31]. Another
study performed on 03 autopsy cardiac specimens, also revealed only
scattered individual cell myocyte necrosis rarely with lymphocytes
adjacent to but not seen to be surrounding degenerating myocytes,
suggesting the possibility of an early viral cytopathic effect. Grossly,
most of the specimens showed cardiomegaly and right ventricular
dilatation [11].
On the other hand, Tavazzi et al. in 2020, demonstrated the presence
of viral particles (electron-dense spike-like structures and size between
70–120 nm) in the interstitial cells of the myocardium, with the absence
of these particles in endothelial cells or cardiomyocytes, thereby sug­
gesting direct myocardial involvement during the viraemic stage of the
disease [32] (Table 1). Zsuzsanna Varga et al., however observed lym­
phocytic endothelitis in various organs of the body including the cardiac
vessels, thereby suggesting impaired microcirculation within the
vascular channels [33]. Moreover, it has also been demonstrated in a
few cases that the development of fulminant viral myocarditis is mostly
associated with a higher viral load [34].
So, as demonstrated by most of the studies the myocardial involve­
ment by COVID19 may not be as severe as compared to other viral in­
fections. Also, the elevated Troponin levels may not truly anticipate the
level of myocardial involvement [35,36]. Cardiac involvement seems to
be more of a response to the inflammatory storm created by the infection
as well as the extensive microvascular involvement owing to massive
endothelitis [33,37]. On the other hand, many studies have also pro­
posed the role of various drugs that are being used for treatment of
COVID19 as reasons for potential deterioration in cardiovascular con­
ditions. As a common example choroquine, which is extensively being
used to reduce the incidence of complications in COVID19 patients, is
known to cause cardiac toxicity in the form of restrictive or dilated
cardiomyopathy along with conduction abnormalities [38].

su et al., in the very first evaluation of renal tissue. They studied 26 renal
post-mortem cases and observed prominent proximal acute tubular
injury (ATI) in the form of loss of brush border, vacuolar degeneration
and dilatation of the tubular lumen with cellular debris. Occasionally
areas of frank necrosis with detachment of epithelium with bare tubular
basement membrane were also observed in few cases. The podocytes
also showed vacuolization and detachment from the glomerular base­
ment membrane. The peritubular and glomerular capillary loops
showed diffuse erythrocyte aggregation (confirmed by CD235a) with
obstruction of the lumen along with endothelial damage. Diabetic
changes were frequently observed in many cases in the form of nodular
mesangial expansion with hyalinosis of arterioles. Also, arteriosclerosis
of medium-size arteries with ischemic glomeruli was seen in 11 of the
patients with hypertension [23] (Table 1).
Another study, observed sclerotic glomeruli in a 44-year-old
COVID19 positive woman who presented with fever, vomiting, wors­
ening cough, and flank pain. She developed AKI superimposed on known
chronic kidney disease, type II diabetes and hypertension. They analysed
24 glomeruli, 14 showed sclerotic changes and rest of the intact
glomeruli showed features of tuft collapse with overlying epithelial
hypertrophy and hyperplasia in the Bowman space. Similar to Hua Su
et al., they also reported significant injury to the tubular epithelium,
prominently in the proximal tubules in the form of reactive nuclei with
mitotic figures, along with denudation of the brush borders [24].
However, they observed no definite viral particles on electron micro­
scopy. Their direct immunofluorescence findings were negative for im­
mune reactants in glomeruli, including IgA, IgG, IgM, C3, C1q, kappa,
and lambda [24], which was in contrast to the other study which showed
non-specific IgM and C3 trapping [23] (Table 1). But indirect immu­
nofluorescence (by Hua su et al.) with SARS-CoV nucleoprotein when
done on the same 06 cases, showed positive granular staining in a nu­
clear or cytoplasm pattern in tubular epithelium in 03 of the cases [23].
On the other hand, electron microscopic findings showed the pres­
ence of coronavirus-like particles in the cytoplasm of renal proximal
tubular epithelium, also in the podocytes and comparatively lesser in the
distal tubules. The size of the particles ranged from 65− 136 nm in
diameter, with characteristic spikes, around 20− 25 nm, in a solar
“corona” like appearance. Other features seen in coronavirus including
adjacent double membrane with surface projections, nucleocapsid
apposing to the viral envelope, and the interior electron-lucence of the
particles had also been distinctively observed. Furthermore, the weak
immunostaining with ACE2 on the proximal tubules in close corre­
spondence with the location of the virus particles observed on electron
microscopy, further supports the involvement of renal tubules as the
major site of involvement by COVID19 infection [23]. Also, the detec­
tion of the presence of viral particles in the blood and urine of patients
with COVID19 infection by polymerase chain reaction too, supports
strong renal involvement [24].
Summarizing, the renal involvement of proximal tubules in the form
of ATI, endothelial damage and podocyte vacuolization depict direct
cytopathic effect of the virus. Whether collapsing glomerulopathy,
which is a fulminant form of kidney disease, as observed in few cases, is
associated with COVID19 related cytokine storm or is related to other
underlying conditions still needs further evaluation and studies.

7. Central nervous system manifestations in COVID19:
Symptoms suggest involvement

6. Cardiac disease in COVID19, involvement analysed

With the onset of various neurological symptoms, the common view
holds and suggests central nervous system (CNS) involvement by
COVID19. The major symptoms mostly presenting include headache,
convulsions, change in mental status and symptoms of encephalitis [39].
Furthermore, the appearance of anosmia as a fairly common symptoms,
also may suggest neurological involvement [40]. Jason Netland et al., in
their experimental study conducted on transgenic mice, showed that the
entry of SARS-CoV virus into the brain occurred by the olfactory bulb,
further leading to trans-neuronal spread. They observed significant
fraction of neurons to be expressing viral antigen by day 4 and suggested

Myocarditis has been known to occur due to multiple causes. Viral
induced myocarditis is also relatively common, mostly associated with
Coxsackie virus, Epstein-Barr virus, Cytomegalovirus, Echovirus, Hep­
atitis B virus, Human Herpes virus 6, HIV -1 and Influenza virus B,
amongst a few [25]. The abundance of expression of ACE2 receptors on
the cardiac myocytes also poses easy feasibility of direct attack by the
virus [26]. So the question arises, “Do COVID19 infection too commonly
causes myocarditis?”, is still under study and is being evaluated
worldwide.
9

A. Singh et al.

Pathology - Research and Practice 224 (2021) 153384

Fig. 1. Diagrammatic picture showing the multisystemic involvement of COVID19 and enumerating the commonly observed histo-pathological changes in each
affected organ.

that the death of the mice occurred due to the death of infected neurons,
particularly the neurons located in the cardiorespiratory centres of the
medulla [41].
A histo-pathological examination of 06 patients who died of
COVID19 in Germany, revealed meningitis, lymphocytic pan­
encephalitis, localized perivascular inflammation and brainstem
neuronal cell damage, in almost all the cases examined. Also, they
observed that all the younger aged cases (<65yrs) exhibited diffuse
petechial haemorrhages owing to massive intracranial haemorrhage due
to COVID19 associated coagulopathy. Hence, in the younger cases, they
attributed CNS haemorrhage to be a fatal complication. However, they
attributed none of these changes to be due to COVID19 induced hypoxia
[42]. On the other hand, Isaac H. Solomon et al., suggested only hypoxia
induced injury in the cerebrum and cerebellum, with no evidence of
meningitis, encephalitis or thrombi and vasculitis. They also found no
cytoplasmic viral staining on immunohistochemical examination [43].
The post-mortem brain examination of a 71-year-old male who died
of COVID19 revealed widespread haemorrhagic white matter lesions
distributed throughout the cerebral hemisphere. Histo-pathology
showed a perivascular acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM)like appearance, along with features of axonal damage. Also, observed
were clusters of macrophages at the periphery of the lesions. (Table 1)
Only scant CD3 positive perivascular lymphocytes were observed.
Hence, this case report highlighted that the postulated mechanism for
this type of insult could be due to para-infectious post viral autoimmune
response apart from primary vascular disease [44]. Another case study,
reported a case of acute necrotizing encephalopathy in a patient with
COVID19, which they postulated might be due to intracranial inflam­
matory cytokine storm like seen in patients with Influenza. In this case
symmetrical hypoattenuation within the bilateral medial thalami was
seen on non-contrast CT imaging. MRI showed haemorrhagic rim
enhancing lesions within the bilateral thalami, medial temporal lobes
and subinsular regions suggestive of acute necrotizing encephalopathy

[45].
The neurological symptoms so commonly appearing in patients with
COVID19 infection, could be due to various reasons. Some of the few
explanations include, direct cytopathic effect by the virus, hypoxia
induced changes, cerebrovascular insults due to coagulopathy and also
metabolic changes [46].
8. Cutaneous involvement: a rare manifestation
With the establishment of COVID19 as having multisystemic mani­
festations, cutaneous involvement by the virus is also now being widely
studied. Various presentations have been described ranging from mac­
ulopapular rash, vesicular rash, petechia/purpura, perniosis (chil­
blains), urticaria, livedo racemosa, and also distal ischemia [47]. I
Hamming et al., studied the localization of ACE2 receptors on various
tissues of the body and found ACE2 to be present in the basal cell layer of
the epidermis (including basal layer of hair follicles) and smooth muscle
cells surrounding the sebaceous glands with weak cytoplasmic staining
in sebaceous gland cells. Also, strong granular staining was observed in
eccrine gland cells [5].
C. Galvan Casaset al., in Spain described 05 cutaneous patterns found
to be associated with COVID19 which included pseudo-chilblain,
monomorphic vesicles, urticaria, maculo-papules and livedo/ necrosis.
Monomorphic disseminated vesicular lesions, which contained hae­
morrhagic content along with pseudo-chilblain, they suspected might be
useful indicators of the disease. On the other hand, urticarial and mac­
ulopapular lesions they postulated might be associated with various
drug reactions and the occurrence of livedo or necrosis suggesting an
occlusive vascular disease [47]. Zhang et al., similarly, in the meanwhile
observed acral ischemic changes in the form of dry gangrene, cyanosis
and skin bullae in 07 patients through which they highlighted the hy­
percoagulable states commonly seen in COVID19 patients [48].
Another study in Italy, evaluated skin manifestations in 18 patients,
10

A. Singh et al.

Pathology - Research and Practice 224 (2021) 153384

of which 08 showed skin involvement at the onset of the disease, and in
10 patients, the manifestations happened during the course of hospi­
talization. Erythematous rash mostly present on the trunk was the most
commonly observed presentation in 14 patients followed by widespread
urticaria seen in 03 patients and chickenpox like vesicles seen in only 01
patient [49]. Varicella-like papulovesicular exanthem has also been
described as a rare yet specific cutaneous manifestation of COVID19, by
Marzano AV et al. They described these lesions to be dominant on the
trunk in a scattered distribution with a few lesions being associated with
mild pruritis, in others pruritis being absent. These lesions mostly
appeared 3 days after the onset of systemic symptoms and disappeared 8
days later. Histo-pathological evaluation of 04 cases revealed
basket-wave hyperkeratosis with mildly atrophic epidermis. Also seen
was vacuolar degeneration of the basal layer with hyperchromatic
multinucleated keratinocytes and dyskeratotic cells. However, they
observed significant absence of inflammatory infiltrate [50] (Table 1).
Similarly, another study in Northern Italy which examined 05 pa­
tients with skin lesions observed maculopapular lesions on the trunk of
two patients with fever, cough and sore throat, suggestive of Grover
disease. On histo-pathology, they observed dyskeratotic cells,
ballooning multinucleation of cells along with presence of sparse
necrotic keratinocytes with lymphocytic satellitosis, hence showing
simultaneous features of both Grover and Kaposi’s varicella form
eruption. The 3rd patients’ skin lesions were studied over a series of
three punch biopsies at different stages of the disease. The lesion began
with an exanthema located on the trunk and limbs, which morpholog­
ically revealed diffuse small telangiectatic blood vessels in the upper
dermis, subsequently showing within the epidermis, nests of Langerhans
cells and finally progressing to a purpuric maculo-papulo-vesicular rash.
The rash revealed perivascular spongiotic dermatitis with exocytosis.
Also, there were large nests of Langerhans cells along with eosinophil
rich dense perivascular lymphocytic infiltration surrounding the swollen
blood vessels with extravasated RBCs. The 4th patient developed
papular erythematous exanthema which showed an edematous dermis
with abundant eosinophils with features of lymphocytic vasculitis, with
the 5th patient revealing a severe macular haemorrhagic rash attributed
to the formation of intravascular microthrombi within the small dermal
vessels. The development of the exanthema they attributed to the he­
matogenous spread of the virus along the cutaneous vascular system
with subsequent activation of the immune system involving the
recruitment of lymphocytes and Langerhans cells present along the skinnodal pathway [51].
Hence, the skin involvement by the virus, presenting as a vast
spectrum of skin manifestations although slightly uncommon, has
emerged as a new area of interest for studying COVID19. Although, the
exact mechanism is still not clear, postulated theories include hema­
togenous dermal spread of the virus, with further immune activation and
cytokine release. There may also be the activation of Langerhans cells
explaining the development of spongiosis and vasodilation. Few other
symptoms like livedo and gangrene however, can be clearly explained
by the propensity to form microthrombi during the course of the
infection [47,48,51]. However, this calls for more studies to further
establish the specificity of these skin lesions to COVID19 infection.

RNA, hence suggesting viral transmission through faeces as a potential
risk in people residing in closed and contained premises [54].
The role of ACE2 receptors and transmembrane serine protease 2
(TMPRSS2) was emphasized by Hao Zhang et al., in the pathogenesis of
COVID19 in the GIT. They found that ACE2 and TMPRSS2 were not only
co-expressed in the alveolar type II cells of the lungs but also in the
esophageal glandular and upper GI epithelial cells and the absorptive
enterocytes of the ileum and colon, thereby, suggesting an entry route
for COVID19 virus in the digestive tract [55]. Tong Meng et al., also
stated that since the entry of COVID19 into host cells depends on the cell
receptor recognition as well as proteases cleaving, the host cells should
be co-expressing both ACE2 receptors and cell proteases TMPRSS2 [56].
Similarly, immunofluorescent data has also shown ACE2 protein to be
expressed on the glandular cells of gastric, duodenal and rectal epithe­
lium [57].
The most common GIT symptoms include diarrhoea, nausea, vom­
iting and anorexia [58,59]. In around 50.5 % (103 out of 204) of the
patients admitted to a hospital in China were found to be showing one or
more digestive symptoms. Out of these 103 patients, 97 presented with
both respiratory as well as digestive symptoms and 06 patients only
developed digestive symptoms without any respiratory symptoms [59].
Ren Mao et al., in their systemic review and meta-analysis postulated
that patients presenting with gastrointestinal symptoms tended to have
an increased risk of acute respiratory distress syndrome and liver injury.
They also stated that patients with severe COVID-19 disease were more
likely to present with abdominal pain in comparison to patients with
non-severe COVID disease [60].
The histo-pathological data regarding the COVID19 changes in the
GIT is very limited. The endoscopic biopsy of 01 patient done by Fie Xiao
et al., revealed no significant damage of the esophageal, gastric,
duodenal and rectal mucosal epithelium on histological examination.
However, they reported lympho-plasmacytic infiltration along with
interstitial edema in the lamina propria of the stomach, duodenum, and
rectum along with occasional lymphocytes in esophageal squamous
epithelium [61] (Table 1). Another autopsy report showed segmental
dilatation and stenosis in the small intestine of an 85-year-old male
positive with COVID19 infection [62]. A case of hemorrhagic colitis was
reported in United States, in a 71-year-old COVID19 positive lady, who
developed nausea, vomiting, anorexia, diffuse abdominal pain with
distention and 10–20 bloody bowel movements per day. Her CT with
intravenous contrast, revealed severe colonic inflammation (more pro­
nounced in the ascending, transverse, and descending colon). The
endoscopic evaluation showed patchy focal erythema without ulcera­
tion in the descending colon, sigmoid colon, and rectum and the histo­
logical examination of the colon and rectal biopsies revealed edema in
the lamina propria with intact crypts with no evidence of infective
colitis/ischemia/or inflammatory bowel disease [63].
In conclusion, GIT involvement by COVID19 is now well established
with widespread GI manifestations of the disease [58–60]. Feco-oral
transmission could be another mode of transmission by the virus
[52–54] which needs to be further studied so that adequate precautions
and measures can be instilled to curb further spread of the virus. How­
ever, information regarding the histo-pathological changes in the GIT
caused by the virus, still remains relatively sparce.

9. Gastrointestinal tract and COVID19: is there a link?

10. Ocular involvement in COVID19: new symptoms emerge

With the isolation of COVID 19 in stool samples, there is increased
speculation about gastro-intestinal tract (GIT) involvement by the virus
during the course of the disease. Many studies have been conducted
throughout the world confirming the same, and also there have been
cases demonstrating the isolation of COVID19 virus in the stool samples
of patients presenting without any GIs symptoms, thus raising suspicion
of an alternate route of infection through feco-oral transmission [52,53].
Yongjian Wu et al., also observed in their study that fecal samples
showed positivity for SARS-CoV-2 RNA for a mean period of 11.2 days
even after the respiratory tract samples tested negative for SARS-CoV-2

COVID19 being a respiratory virus with, aerosol and droplet trans­
mission being the major mode of transmission, the exposed conjunctival
surfaces of the eyes also seem to be an important portal of entry for the
virus, which also explains the new emerging ocular symptoms in
infected patients [64]. Newer studies, like previously discussed, high­
light the role of both ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in the entry of the virus [55,
56]. Dia Ma et al. in 2004, in their study stated that the cornea as
compared to the conjunctiva had higher propensity to be infected by
COVID19 as mouse corneal tissue showed higher expression of ACE2
11

A. Singh et al.

Pathology - Research and Practice 224 (2021) 153384

and TMPRSS2 [65].
The most common symptom being described in humans is conjunc­
tivitis, [66] with pyogranulomatous anterior uveitis, choroiditis with
retinal detachment and retinal vasculitis being described in felines [67].
A 65-year-old COVID19 positive woman admitted to a hospital in Italy
presented with cough, sore throat, coryza, and bilateral conjunctivitis.
An ocular swab when done detected the presence of viral RNA in the
ocular sample collected [68]. Similarly, Sergio Zaccaria Scalinci et al.,
also studied 05 patients whose preliminary symptoms included features
of acute conjunctivitis which showed conjunctival hyperemia, epiphora,
discharge, and photophobia [69]. Similarly, in a case series of 38 pa­
tients in Hubei, China, 12 patients presented with ocular symptoms
which included epiphora, conjunctival congestion and chemosis. Out of
these 38 patients, 02 patients showed a positive COVID19 test, done on
the conjunctival specimen. However, they also observed that patients
who presented with ocular symptoms were more likely to have leuko­
cytosis and neutrophilia along with higher procalcitonin, CRP, and LDH
levels as compared to patients without ocular symptoms. This could
possibly suggest that ocular symptoms appear more commonly in pa­
tients with severe pneumonia [70].
The presence of COVID19 was evaluated in the tears and conjunc­
tival secretions, by Jianhua Xia MM et al. They reported that out of the
30 COVID19 positive patients that they studied (21 had common disease
and 09 had severe disease), the only tear and conjunctival sample that
came out to be positive was that of the only 01 patient who presented
with symptoms of conjunctivitis. Hence, they reported detection of no
viral RNA in the tear fluid or the conjunctival secretions of the severe or
common-type patients without conjunctivitis [71].
The vast diversity of ocular symptoms of COVID19 along with its late
sequelae, was also highlighted by Valentin Navel et al., who reported
haemorrhagic conjunctivitis with pseudomembrane in a 63-year-old
male who tested positive for COVID19. He initially presented with
only respiratory symptoms but on day 17, viral conjunctivitis developed
with subsequent formation of follicles, petechias, tarsal hemorrhages
and chemosis. Also, observed was the development of a pseudomem­
brane which was thin yellowish-white translucid on the tarsal con­
junctiva of lower lids which could be easily peeled off without bleeding.
However, COVID19 viral RNA could not be demonstrated in the
conjunctival secretions and tears of the patient [72].
Despite paucity of literature, the involvement of COVID19 in the
occurrence of various ocular symptoms, with conjunctivitis being the
commonest, seems very likely [66,68,69]. The detection of COVID19
RNA in the tear and conjunctival secretions, even though seen only in a
few cases, confirms the same [69–71,73]. One of the widely accepted
theories include direct inoculation of the virus, through aerosol and
droplet into the conjunctival surface with subsequent movement via the
nasolacrimal duct or hematogenous spread [74–76].

of testosterone to LH and the ratio of follicle stimulating hormone to LH
were dramatically decreased in males with COVID19 [79]. An autopsy
series conducted on the testicular tissue of 11 COVID19 men in China,
revealed Sertoli cells to be most prominently affected showing cellular
swelling, vacuolation and cytoplasmic rarefaction along with detach­
ment from the tubular basement membrane. They also observed
sloughing and loss of the intratubular cell mass and graded the injury to
the seminiferous tubular based on its severity into mild (02), moderate
(05), or severe (04) (Table 1). Also, interstitial edema with mild in­
flammatory infiltrates comprising of CD3-positive T lymphocytes and
CD68-positive histiocytes was observed and 08 out of 11 cases showed
variable degrees of spermatogenic alteration, thereby highlighting evi­
dence of testicular injury in COVID19 positive men. However, the
presence of viral RNA was detected in the testis of only 01 case [80].
Scrotal discomfort was reported by 19 % of COVID19 positive cases
under evaluation in China, suggestive of viral orchitis, however, no
comprehensive genitourinary examination was performed to confirm
the same and none of the semen samples collected from these patients
detected COVID19 RNA [81]. With the lack of enough evidence of the
presence of viral RNA in testicular tissue and seminal fluid raises various
doubts, but the development of viral orchitis and Sertoli cell changes
during the course of COVID19 infections, calls for the need to evaluate
and study more data.
There is paucity of literature regarding the female genital tract and
COVID19, however, a recent study suggested a possible link between
polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) and COVID19, stating that females
with PCOS might be at a higher risk of developing adverse COVID19
related outcomes [82]. But, the effect of COVID19 infection on the fe­
male reproductive health still remains unexplored.
11.2. Thyroid
Thyroid involvement, especially the development of subacute
thyroiditis (SAT) post-viral infection is quite common [83]. An isolated
case report of an 18-year-old female, was reported by Alessandro
Brancatella et al., in Italy who developed fever, neck pain radiating to
the jaw along with palpitations, 15 days post a positive COVID19 report.
Her laboratory tests showed increased free thyroxine and free triiodo­
thyronine levels, and elevated inflammatory markers and leukocytosis.
The neck ultrasound revealed bilateral and diffuse hypoechoic areas and
was diagnosed with SAT [84]. An autopsy series of 05 patients in 2007,
reported thyroid dysfunction in SARS-CoV patients, and observed par­
afollicular and follicular cell injury along with evidence cellular necro­
sis. They found few of the thyroid follicles to be dilated, others collapsed
and distorted with irregular outline, also with others showing a micro­
folliclar configuration [85] (Table 1). But with just few studies in this
area the knowledge of the effect of COVID19 infection on the thyroid
gland is still scare.

11. Endocrine system and COVID19: understanding the intricate
changes

11.3. Pancreas

The presence of ACE2 receptors on endocrine organs like pancreas
and testis [77,78] along with multiple case studies reporting COVID19
related endocrinal abnormalities, raises the question of a possible link
between the two.

Exocrinal involvement in the form of acute pancreatitis was reported
in a 35-year-old COVID19 positive obese female [86] and studies also
state that the high and aberrantly glycosylated ACE2 in uncontrolled
hyperglycemia, could aid the cellular entry of COVID19 thereby causing
a much more severe disease [87]. Increased blood glucose levels and
abnormal variability of glucose can be seen in diabetic patients with
COVID19 disease possibly due to stressful conditions triggering elevated
release of hyperglycemic hormones [88]. Jin-Kui Yang et al., compared
39 SARS patients who had no previous diabetes and had received no
steroid treatment with 39 matched healthy siblings in a 3-year follow-up
period. They found that 20 patients of the 39 developed diabetes during
hospitalization however after 3 years, only two of these patients
continued to be diabetic. Hence, they suggested that the localization of
ACE2 receptors in the endocrine part of the pancreas lead to increased
uptake of the SARS coronavirus, subsequently leading to uncontrolled

11.1. Genital system
The effect of COVID19 on the testis is still debated, however, the
abundance of ACE2 receptors on the testis including spermatogonia,
Leydig and Sertoli cells, raises the need for more research on the topic
[78]. Ling Ma et al., in order to study the effects of COVID19 on male sex
hormones, compared the levels of sex-related hormones between
COVID19 positive reproductive-aged men and age-matched healthy
men. They found the levels of serum luteinizing hormone (LH) to be
significantly increased in COVID19 positive men but observed the ratio
12

A. Singh et al.

Pathology - Research and Practice 224 (2021) 153384

hyperglycemia and development of acute diabetes [89].
Thereby, literature suggests that the presence of diabetes not only
could act as a risk factor for the development of more severe COVID19
disease, but also COVID19 infection in a previously euglycemic patient
could cause a sustained inflammatory state causing hyperglycemia and
subsequently leading to the development of diabetes.

remains unclear. Conjunctivitis is a new symptom, now increasing being
seen in cases with COVID19, and the expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2
on the corneal surface can also act as a new portal of entry for the
COVID19 virus. Cutaneous involvement, although quite rare, has also
been observed in the form of livedo and gangrene due to microthrombi
formation owing to a hypercoagulable state.
The presence of ACE2 receptors on the testis, and the evidence of
Sertoli cell injury with varying damage to the seminiferous tubules,
raises the question of prolonged long term effect on the male repro­
ductive health. The development of a hyperglycaemic state in patients
with COVID19 also poses the threat of developing acute diabetes, as
observed in some studies. However, there remains no evidence of
maternal to fetal transmission of COVID19 infection till date, to the best
of our knowledge.

11.4. Does COVID19 adversely affect outcome in pregnancy?
Maternal to fetal transmission of infections are well known especially
for the TORCH group of infections, as well as with the newer viruses
including Zika and Ebola [90]. The prospect of whether there is vertical
transmission of COVID19 from mother to infant still mostly remains
unexplored. Various reports exist of miscarriages, intrauterine growth
restriction and preterm birth in women infected with SARS-CoV, how­
ever no vertical transmission of infection was noted by Schwartz DA, of
SARS-CoV in these women [91].
A recent study in China, analysed 10 neonates born to COVID-19
positive mothers, out of which nasopharyngeal swabs were collected
from 09 of these neonates who tested negative for COVID19. They
clinically assessed all the neonates and concluded that the presence of
perinatal COVID19 infection may cause adverse effects like: premature
labor, fetal distress, neonatal respiratory distress, thrombocytopenia
with abnormal liver function, and even death [92]. On the contrary,
Xiaotong Wang et al. in 2020, reported the case of a 30-week COVID19
positive pregnant woman with atypical pneumonia who delivered a
preterm healthy baby with no evidence of COVID-19 [93]. Similarly, L
Zhang et al., compared the pregnancy outcomes of 16 COVID19 positive
women with 45 women without COVID19, they too reported no signif­
icant difference between the two groups in terms of blood loss, neonatal
birth weight, fetal distress, meconium-stained amniotic fluid and
neonatal asphyxia. Also, none of the neonates tested positive for
COVID19 on RT-PCR [94]. Huijun Chen et al., also when retrospectively
analysed 09 pregnant woman with COVID 19 they found no significant
difference in the clinical characteristics of COVID19 pneumonia in
pregnant women as compared to non-pregnant adult patients with
COVID19 pneumonia, and reported no fetal infection due to intrauterine
vertical transmission [95].
Reviewing the current available literature, none of the studies so far
provided evidence of maternal to fetal transmission of COVID19 infec­
tion, however due to the scantiness of the studies available so far, the
conclusion of no vertical transmission is still premature.

Declaration of Competing Interest
None.
Submission declaration and verification
Not been published previously.
Study registration
No registration was required as the article submitted is a review
article.
Ethical clearance
No ethical clearance was required as the article submitted is a review
article.
Author contributions
The authors mentioned in the article confirm being the sole con­
tributors of this work and have approved it for publication.
References
[1] D.S. Hui, E.I. Azhar, T.A. Madani, F. Ntoumi, R. Kock, O. Dar, et al., The continuing
2019-nCoV epidemic threat of novel coronaviruses to global health—the latest
2019 novel coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan, China, Int. J. Infect. Dis. 91 (2020)
264–266, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.01.009.
[2] C. Huang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Ren, J. Zhao, Y. Hu, et al., Clinical features of patients
infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China, Lancet 39 (2020) 497–506,
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30183-5.
[3] M.Y. Li, L. Li, Y. Zhang, X.S. Wang, Expression of the SARS-CoV-2 cell receptor
gene ACE2 in a wide variety of human tissues, Infect. Dis. Poverty 9 (2020) 45,
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40249-020-00662-x.
[4] R.J. Mason, Pathogenesis of COVID-19 from a cell biology perspective, Eur. Respir.
J. 55 (2020), 2000607, https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.00607-2020.
[5] I. Hamming, W. Timens, M.L. Bulthuis, A.T. Lely, G. Navis, H. van Goor, Tissue
distribution of ACE2 protein, the functional receptor for SARS coronavirus. A first
step in understanding SARS pathogenesis, J. Pathol. 203 (2004) 631–637, https://
doi.org/10.1002/path.1570.
[6] A. Jain, COVID-19 and lung pathology, Indian J. Pathol. Microbiol. 63 (2) (2020)
171–172, https://doi.org/10.4103/IJPM.IJPM_280_20.
[7] H. Zhang, P. Zhou, Y. Wei, J. Zhang, L. Huang, C. Zhang, et al., Histopathologic
changes and SARS-CoV-2 immunostaining in the lung of a patient with COVID-19,
Ann. Intern. Med. 172 (2020) 629–632, https://doi.org/10.7326/M20-0533.
[8] M.C. Copin, E. Parmentier, T. Duburcq, J. Poissy, Mathieu D. Lille, COVID-19 ICU
and Anatomopathology Group, Time to consider histologic pattern of lung injury to
treat critically ill patients with COVID-19 infection, Intensive Care Med. 46 (2020)
1124–1126, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00134-020-06057-8.
[9] M.B. Beasley, T.J. Franks, J.R. Galvin, B. Gochuico, W.D. Travis, Acute fibrinous
and organizing pneumonia: a histological pattern of lung injury and possible
variant of diffuse alveolar damage, Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. 126 (2002) 1064–1070,
https://doi.org/10.1043/0003-9985(2002)126<1064:AFAOP>2.0.CO;2.
[10] Z. Xu, L. Shi, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, L. Huang, C. Zhang, et al., Pathological findings of
COVID-19 associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome, Lancet Respir. Med.
8 (2020) 420–422, https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30076-X.
[11] S.E. Fox, A. Akmatbekov, J.L. Harbert, G. Li, J. Quincy Brown, R.S. Vander Heide,
Pulmonary and cardiac pathology in African American patients with COVID-19: an

12. Conclusion
COVID19 with its myriad of symptoms is now being well established
as a pan-systemic disease. The lungs, however still seem to be the most
commonly affected organ, with multiple bilateral patchy ground glass
opacities being the most frequently observed radiological findings. DAD
with intra-alveolar fibrinous exudates and loose interstitial fibrosis can
safely be described as the most common histological pattern observed in
pulmonary biopsies in patients with COVID19. GI involvement of the
disease, presenting in the form of diarrhoea raises the speculation of
feco-oral transmission of COVID19, although the histopathological
findings of the gastro-intestinal tract and the liver still appear quite nonspecific. Information regarding COVID19 as a renal disease, is sparse,
however, few studies have established the presence of Corona-virus like
particles in the cytoplasm of renal proximal tubular epithelium, podo­
cytes and less so in the distal tubules.
The histological examination of the heart appears non-specific
findings with nil to minimal epicardial and myocardial inflammation,
ruling out the occurrence of viral myocarditis, which is commonly seen
in other viral infections. Evidence of meningitis and lymphocytic pan­
encephalitis in patients with COVID19 has also been observed by few
studies, but, whether to describe these changes as due to direct viral
cytopathic changes or due to hypoxia and other metabolic changes still
13

A. Singh et al.

[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]
[18]

[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]
[33]
[34]

[35]

Pathology - Research and Practice 224 (2021) 153384
[36] A.R. Chapman, A. Bularga, N.L. Mills, High-sensitivity cardiac troponin can Be an
ally in the fight against COVID-19, Circulation 141 (22) (2020) 1733–1735,
https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.047008.
[37] Rm Inciardi, L. Lupi, G. Zaccone, L. Italia, M. Raffo, D. Tomasoni, et al., Cardiac
involvement in a patient with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), JAMA
Cardiol. 5 (7) (2020) 819–824, https://doi.org/10.1001/jamacardio.2020.1096.
[38] S. Aslam, M.R. Mehra, COVID-19: yet another coronavirus challenge in
transplantation, J. Heart Lung Transpl. 39 (5) (2020) 408–409, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.healun.2020.03.007.
[39] M. Desforges, A. Le Coupanec, P. Dubeau, A. Bourgouin, L. Lajoie, M. Dubé, et al.,
Human coronaviruses and other respiratory viruses: underestimated opportunistic
pathogens of the central nervous system? Viruses 12 (1) (2019) 14, https://doi.
org/10.3390/v12010014.
[40] J. Kipnis, Immune system: the “seventh sense”, J. Exp. Med. 215 (2) (2018)
397–398, https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20172295.
[41] J. Netland, D.K. Meyerholz, S. Moore, M. Cassell, S. Perlman, Severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection causes neuronal death in the absence
of encephalitis in mice transgenic for human ACE2, J. Virol. 82 (15) (2008)
7264–7275, https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00737-08.
[42] C.H. von Weyhern, I. Kaufmann, F. Neff, M. Kremer, Early evidence of pronounced
brain involvement in fatal COVID-19 outcomes, Lancet 395 (10241) (2020) e109,
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31282-4.
[43] I.H. Solomon, E. Normandin, S. Bhattacharyya, S.S. Mukerji, K. Keller, A.S. Ali, et
al., Neuropathological features of Covid-19, N. Engl. J. Med. 383 (10) (2020)
989–992, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMc2019373.
[44] R.R. Reichard, K.B. Kashani, N.A. Boire, E. Constantopoulos, Y. Guo, C.
F. Lucchinetti, Neuropathology of COVID-19: a spectrum of vascular and acute
disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM)‑like pathology, Acta Neuropathol. 140
(2020) 1–6, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-020-02166-2.
[45] N. Poyiadji, G. Shahin, D. Noujaim, M. Stone, S. Patel, B. Griffith, COVID-19associated Acute Hemorrhagic Necrotizing Encephalopathy: Imaging Features,
Radiology 296 (2) (2020) E119–E120, https://doi.org/10.1148/
radiol.2020201187.
[46] Y. Wu, X. Xu, L. Yang, C. Liu, C. Yang, Nervous system damage after COVID-19
infection: Presence or absence? Brain Behav. Immun. 87 (2020) 55, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bbi.2020.04.043.
[47] C. Galván Casas, A. Català, G. Carretero Hernández, P. Rodríguez-Jiménez,
D. Fernández-Nieto, et al., Classification of the cutaneous manifestations of COVID19: a rapid prospective nationwide consensus study in Spain with 375 cases, Br. J.
Dermatol. 183 (1) (2020) 71–77, https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.19163.
[48] Y. Zhang, W. Cao, M. Xiao, Y.J. Li, Y. Yang, J. Zhao, et al., Clinical and coagulation
characteristics of 7 patients with critical COVID-2019 pneumonia and acroischemia, Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi 41 (Mar (0)) (2020) E006, https://doi.org/
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-2727.2020.0006. Chinese.
[49] S. Recalcati, Cutaneous manifestations in COVID-19: a first perspective, J. Eur.
Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. 34 (5) (2020) e212–e213, https://doi.org/10.1111/
jdv.16387.
[50] A.V. Marzano, G. Genovese, G. Fabbrocini, P. Pigatto, G. Monfrecola, B.
M. Piraccini, et al., Varicella-like exanthem as a specific COVID-19-associated skin
manifestation: multicenter case series of 22 patients, J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 83 (1)
(2020) 280–285, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2020.04.044.
[51] R. Gianotti, P. Zerbi, R.P. Dodiuk-Gad, Clinical and histopathological study of skin
dermatoses in patients affected by COVID-19 infection in the Northern part of Italy,
J. Dermatol. Sci. 98 (2) (2020) 141–143, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jdermsci.2020.04.007.
[52] M.L. Holshue, C. DeBolt, S. Lindquist, K.H. Lofy, J. Wiesman, H. Bruce, et al., First
case of 2019 novel coronavirus in the United States, N. Engl. J. Med. 382 (10)
(2020) 929–936, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2001191.
[53] W. Wang, Y. Xu, R. Gao, R. Lu, K. Han, G. Wu, et al., Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in
different types of clinical specimens, JAMA 323 (18) (2020) 1843–1844, https://
doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.3786.
[54] Y. Wu, C. Guo, L. Tang, Z. Hong, J. Zhou, X. Dong, et al., Prolonged presence of
Sars-CoV-2 viral rna in faecal samples, Lancet Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 5 (2020)
434–435, https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468-1253(20)30083-2.
[55] H. Zhang, Z. Kang, H. Gong, D. Xu, J. Wang, Z. Li, et al., Digestive system is a
potential route of COVID-19: an analysis of single-cell coexpression pattern of key
proteins in viral entry process, Gut 69 (6) (2020) 1010–1018, https://doi.org/
10.1136/gutjnl-2020-320953.
[56] T. Meng, H. Cao, H. Zhang, Z. Kang, D. Xu, H. Gong, et al., The insert sequence in
SARS–CoV-2 enhances spike protein cleavage by TMPRSS, bioRxiv. (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.08.926006.
[57] F. Xiao, M. Tang, X. Zheng, Y. Liu, X. Li, H. Shan, Evidence for gastrointestinal
infection of SARS-CoV-2, Gastroenterology 158 (6) (2020), https://doi.org/
10.1053/j.gastro.2020.02.055, 1831–1833.e3.
[58] W. Guan, Z. Ni, Y. Hu, W. Liang, C. Ou, J. He, et al., Clinical characteristics of novel
coronavirus infection in China, N. Engl. J. Med. 382 (2020) 1708–1720, https://
doi.org/10.1056/nejmoa2002032.
[59] L. Pan, M. Mu, H.G. Ren, J.Y. Tan, X.H. Li, J. Liang, et al., Clinical characteristics of
COVID-19 patients with digestive symptoms in Hubei, China: a descriptive, crosssectional, multicenter study, Am. J. Gastroenterol. 115 (2020) 766–773, https://
doi.org/10.14309/ajg.0000000000000620.
[60] R. Mao, Y. Qiu, J.S. He, J.Y. Tan, X.H. Li, J. Liang, et al., Manifestations and
prognosis of gastrointestinal and liver involvement in patients with COVID-19: a
systematic review and meta-analysis, Lancet Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 5 (7) (2020)
667–678, https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468-1253(20)30126-6.

autopsy series from New Orleans, Lancet Respir. Med. 8 (7) (2020) 681–686,
https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30243-5.
B.J. Barnes, J.M. Adrover, A. Baxter-Stoltzfus, A. Borczuk, J. Cools-Lartigue, J.
M. Crawford, et al., Targeting potential drivers of COVID-19: neutrophil
extracellular traps, J. Exp. Med. 217 (6) (2020) e20200652, https://doi.org/
10.1084/jem.20200652.
T. Schaller, K. Hirschbühl, K. Burkhardt, G. Braun, M. Trepel, B. Marki, et al.,
Postmortem examination of patients with COVID-19, JAMA 323 (2020)
2518–2520, https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.8907.
J. Gu, C. Korteweg, Pathology and pathogenesis of severe acute respiratory
syndrome, Am. J. Pathol. 170 (2007) 1136–1147, https://doi.org/10.2353/
ajpath.2007.061088.
J.M. Vanden Brand, S.L. Smits, B.L. Haagmans, Pathogenesis of Middle East
respiratory syndrome coronavirus, J. Pathol. 235 (2015) 175–184, https://doi.org/
10.1002/path.4458.
M. Giani, D. Seminati, A. Lucchini, G. Foti, F. Pagni, Exuberant plasmocytosis in
Bronchoalveolar Lavage specimen of the first patient requiring extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation for SARS-CoV-2 in Europe, J. Thorac. Oncol. 15 (2020)
e65–e66, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtho.2020.03.008.
X. Chai, L. Hu, Y. Zhang, W. Han, Z. Lu, A. Ke, et al., Specific ACE2 expression in
cholangiocytes may cause liver damage after 2019-nCov infection, bioRxiv (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.03.931766.
Y. Zhang, L. Zheng, L. Liu, M. Zhao, J. Xiao, Q. Zhao, Liver impairment in COVID19 patients: A retrospective analysis of 115 cases from a single centre in Wuhan
city, China, Liver Int. 40 (9) (2020) 2095–2103, https://doi.org/10.1111/
liv.14455.
L. Li, S. Li, M. Xu, P. Yu, S. Zheng, Z. Duan, et al., Risk factors related to hepatic
injury in patients with corona virus disease 2019, medRxiv (2020), https://doi.
org/10.1101/2020.02.28.20028514 preprint.
S. Tian, Y. Xiong, H. Liu, L. Niu, J. Guo, M. Liao, et al., Pathological study of the
2019 novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) through postmortem core biopsies,
Mod. Pathol. 33 (2020) 1007–1014, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41379-020-0536-x.
Y. Cheng, R. Luo, K. Wang, M. Zhang, Z. Wang, L. Dong, et al., Kidney disease is
associated with in-hospital death of patients with COVID-19, Kidney Int. 97 (5)
(2020) 829–838, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2020.03.005.
M. Ye, J. Wysocki, J. William, M.J. Soler, I. Cokic, D. Batlle, Glomerular
localization and expression of Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 and Angiotensinconverting enzyme: implications for albuminuria in diabetes, J. Am. Soc. Nephrol.
17 (11) (2006) 3067–3075, https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2006050423.
H. Su, M. Yang, C. Wan, L.X. Yi, F. Tang, H.Y. Zhu, et al., Renal histopathological
analysis of 26 postmortem findings of patients with COVID-19 in China, Kidney Int.
98 (1) (2020) 219–227, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2020.04.003.
S. Kissling, S. Rotman, C. Gerber, M. Halfon, F. Lamoth, D. Comte, et al., Collapsing
glomerulopathy in a COVID-19 patient, Kidney Int. 98 (1) (2020) 228–231,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2020.04.006.
R. Dennert, H.J. Crijns, S. Heymans, Acute viral myocarditis, Eur. Heart J. 29 (17)
(2008) 2073–2082, https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehn296.
G. Li, R. Hu, X. Zhang, Antihypertensive treatment with ACEI/ARB of patients with
COVID-19 complicated by hypertension, Hypertens. Res. 43 (6) (2020) 588–590,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41440-020-0433-1.
H. Fan, L. Zhang, B. Huang, M. Zhu, Y. Zhou, et al., Cardiac injuries in patients with
coronavirus disease 2019: not to be ignored, Int. J. Infect. Dis. 96 (2020) 294–297,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.05.024.
T. Guo, Y. Fan, M. Chen, X. Wu, L. Zhang, T. He, et al., Association of
cardiovascular disease and myocardial injury with outcomes of patients
hospitalized with 2019-corona virus disease (COVID-19), JAMA Cardiol. 5 (2020)
811–818, https://doi.org/10.1001/jamacardio.2020.1017.
Y. Szekely, Y. Lichter, P. Taieb, A. Banai, A. Hochstadt, I. Merdler, et al., Spectrum
of cardiac manifestations in COVID-19: a systematic echocardiographic study,
Circulation 142 (4) (2020) 342–353, https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.120.047971.
F. Zhou, T. Yu, R. Du, G. Fan, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, et al., Clinical course and risk factors
for mortality of adult in patients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective
cohort study, Lancet 395 (2020) 1054–1062, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736
(20)30566-3.
L.M. Buja, D.A. Wolf, B. Zhao, B. Akkanti, M. McDonald, L. Lelenwa, et al., The
emerging spectrum of cardiopulmonary pathology of the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19): report of 3 autopsies from Houston, Texas, and review of autopsy
findings from other United States cities, Cardiovasc. Pathol. 48 (2020), 107233,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carpath.2020.107233.
G. Tavazzi, C. Pellegrini, M. Maurelli, M. Belliato, F. Sciutti, A. Bottazzi, et al.,
Myocardial localization of coronavirus in COVID-19 cardiogenic shock, Eur. J.
Heart Fail. 22 (5) (2020) 911–915, https://doi.org/10.1002/ejhf.1828.
Z. Varga, A.J. Flammer, P. Steiger, M. Haberecker, R. Andermatt, A.S. Zinkernagel,
et al., Endothelial cell infection and endotheliitis in COVID-19, Lancet 395 (10234)
(2020) 1417–1418, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30937-5.
Y. Liu, Y. Yang, C. Zhang, F. Huang, F. Wang, J. Yuan, et al., Clinical and
biochemical indexes from 2019-nCoV infected patients linked to viral loads and
lung injury, Sci. China Life Sci. 63 (3) (2020) 364–374, https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11427-020-1643-8.
G. Lippi, C.J. Lavie, F. Sanchis-Gomar, Cardiac troponin I in patients with
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): evidence from a meta-analysis, Prog.
Cardiovasc. Dis. 63 (3) (2020) 390–391, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pcad.2020.03.001.

14

A. Singh et al.

Pathology - Research and Practice 224 (2021) 153384
[78] C. Fan, K. Li, Y. Ding, W. Lu, J. Wang, et al., ACE2 expression in kidney and testis
may cause kidney and testis damage after 2019-nCoV infection, medRxiv (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.12.20022418.
[79] L. Ma, W. Xie, D. Li, L. Shi, Y. Mao, Y. Xiong, et al., Effect of SARS-CoV-2 infection
upon maL.e gonadal function: a single center-based study, medRxiv (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.21.20037267.
[80] M. Yang, S. Chen, B. Huang, J.M. Zhong, H. Su, Y.J. Chen, et al., Pathological
findings in the testes of COVID-19 patients: clinical implications, Eur. Urol. Focus 6
(5) (2020) 1124–1129, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euf.2020.05.009.
[81] F. Pan, X. Xiao, J. Guo, Y. Song, H. Li, D.P. Patel, et al., No evidence of severe acute
respiratory syndrome-coronavirus 2 in semen of males recovering from
coronavirus disease 2019, Fertil. Steril. 113 (6) (2020) 1135–1139, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2020.04.024.
[82] I. Kyrou, E. Karteris, T. Robbins, K. Chatha, F. Drenos, Hs. Randeva, Polycystic
ovary syndrome (PCOS) and COVID-19: an overlooked female patient population
at potentially higher risk during the COVID-19 pandemic, BMC Med. 18 (1) (2020)
220, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-020-01697-5.
[83] R. Desailloud, D. Hober, Viruses and thyroiditis: an update, Virol. J. 6 (2009) 5,
https://doi.org/10.1186/1743-422X-6-5.
[84] A. Brancatella, D. Ricci, N. Viola, D. Sgrò, F. Santini, Latrofa F. Subacute thyroiditis
after Sars-COV-2 infection, J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 105 (7) (2020) dgaa276,
https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgaa276.
[85] L. Wei, S. Sun, C.H. Xu, J. Zhang, Y. Xu, H. Zhu, et al., Pathology of the thyroid in
severe acute respiratory syndrome, Hum. Pathol. 38 (1) (2007) 95–102, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.humpath.2006.06.011.
[86] M.M. Aloysius, A. Thatti, A. Gupta, N. Sharma, P. Bansal, H. Goyal, COVID-19
presenting as acute pancreatitis, Pancreatology 20 (5) (2020) 1026–1027, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.pan.2020.05.003.
[87] A. Brufsky, Hyperglycemia, hydroxychloroquine, and the COVID-19 epidemic,
J. Med. Virol. 92 (7) (2020) 770–775, https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.25887.
[88] A. Wang, W. Zhao, Z. Xu, J. Gu, Timely blood glucose management for the
outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is urgently needed,
Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract. 162 (2020), 108118, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
diabres.2020.108118.
[89] J.K. Yang, S.S. Lin, X.J. Ji, L.M. Guo, Binding of SARS coronavirus to its receptor
damages islets and causes acute diabetes, Acta Diabetol. 47 (3) (2010) 193–199,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00592-009-0109-4.
[90] D.A. Schwartz, The origins and emergence of Zika virus, the newest TORCH
infection: what’s old is new again, Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. 141 (1) (2017) 18–25,
https://doi.org/10.5858/arpa.2016-0429-ED.
[91] D.A. Schwartz, A.L. Graham, Potential maternal and infant outcomes from
Coronavirus 2019-nCoV (SARS-CoV-2) infecting pregnant women: lessons from
SARS, MERS, and other human coronavirus infections, Viruses 12 (2) (2020) 194,
https://doi.org/10.3390/v12020194.
[92] H. Zhu, L. Wang, C. Fang, S. Peng, L. Zhang, G. Chang, et al., Clinical analysis of 10
neonates born to mothers with 2019-nCoV pneumonia, Transl. Pediatr. 9 (1)
(2020) 51–60, https://doi.org/10.21037/tp.2020.02.06.
[93] X. Wang, Z. Zhou, J. Zhang, F. Zhu, Y. Tang, X. Shen, A case of 2019 novel
coronavirus in a pregnant woman with preterm delivery, Clin. Infect. Dis. 71 (15)
(2020) 844–846, https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa200.
[94] L. Zhang, Y. Jiang, M. Wei, Z. Fu, C. Ke, Z. Zhi, et al., Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi
Z. 55 (3) (2020) 166–171, https://doi.org/10.3760/cma.j.cn112141-2020021800111.
[95] H. Chen, J. Guo, C. Wang, F. Luo, X. Yu, P.W. Zhang, et al., Clinical characteristics
and intrauterine vertical transmission potential of COVID-19 infection in nine
pregnant women: a retrospective review of medical records, Lancet 395 (10226)
(2020) 809–815, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30360-3.

[61] F. Xiao, M. Tang, X. Zheng, Y. Liu, X. Li, H. Shan, Evidence for gastrointestinal
infection of SARS-CoV-2, Gastroenterology 158 (6) (2020), https://doi.org/
10.1053/j.gastro.2020.02.055, 1831-1833.e3.
[62] Q. Liu, R.S. Wang, G.Q. Qu, Y.Y. Wang, P. Liu, Y.Z. Zhu, et al., Gross examination
report of a COVID-19 death autopsy, Fa Yi Xue Za Zhi 36 (1) (2020) 21–23, https://
doi.org/10.12116/j.issn.1004-5619.2020.01.005. English, Chinese.
[63] A. Carvalho, R. Alqusairi, A. Adams, M. Paul, N. Kothary, S. Peters, et al., SARSCoV-2 gastrointestinal infection causing hemorrhagic colitis: implications for
detection and transmission of COVID-19 disease, Am. J. Gastroenterol. 115 (6)
(2020) 942–946, https://doi.org/10.14309/ajg.0000000000000667.
[64] B. De Broff, COVID-19: ocular manifestations, ocular secretions, and ocular portal
of entry, Adv. Ophthalmol. Vis. Syst. 10 (2) (2020) 48–49, https://doi.org/
10.15406/aovs.2020.10.00382.
[65] D. Ma, C. Chen, V. Jhanji, C. Xu, X.L. Yuan, J.J. Liang, et al., Expression of SARSCoV-2 receptor ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in human primary conjunctival and pterygium
cell lines and in mouse cornea, Eye 34 (2020) 1212–1219, https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41433-020-0939-4.
[66] L. van der Hoek, K. Pyrc, M.F. Jebbink, W. Vermeulen-Oost, R.J. Berkhout, K.
C. Wolthers, et al., Identification of a new human coronavirus, Nat. Med. 10 (2004)
368–373, https://doi.org/10.1038/nm1024.
[67] M.J. Doherty, Ocular manifestations of feline infectious peritonitis, J. Am. Vet.
Med. Assoc. 159 (1971) 417–424. PMID: 5107089.
[68] F. Colavita, D. Lapa, F. Carletti, E. Lalle, L. Bordi, P. Marsella, et al., SARS-CoV-2
isolation from ocular secretions of a patient with COVID-19 in Italy with prolonged
viral RNA, Ann. Intern. Med. 173 (2020) 242–243, https://doi.org/10.7326/M201176.
[69] S.Z. Scalinci, E. Trovato Battagliola, Conjunctivitis can be the only presenting sign
and symptom of COVID-19, IDCases 20 (2020), e00774, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.idcr.2020.e00774.
[70] P. Wu, F. Duan, C. Luo, Q. Liu, X. Qu, L. Liang, et al., Characteristics of ocular
findings of patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Hubei Province,
China, JAMA Ophthalmol. 138 (5) (2020) 575–578, https://doi.org/10.1001/
jamaophthalmol.2020.1291.
[71] J. Xia, J. Tong, M. Liu, Y. Shen, D. Guo, Evaluation of coronavirus in tears and
conjunctival secretions of patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, J. Med. Virol. 92 (6)
(2020) 589–594, https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.25725.
[72] V. Navel, F. Chiambaretta, F. Dutheil, Haemorrhagic conjunctivitis with
pseudomembranous related to SARS-CoV-2, Am. J. Ophthalmol. Case Rep. 19
(2020), 100735, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajoc.2020.100735.
[73] J. Xia, J. Tong, M. Liu, Y. Shen, D. Guo, Evaluation of coronavirus in tears and
conjunctival secretions of patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, J. Med. Virol. 92 (6)
(2020) 589–594, https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.25725.
[74] X. Sun, X. Zhang, X. Chen, D. Chaohua, Z. Xiaojing, L. Weiyong, et al., The infection
evidence of SARS-COV-2 in ocular surface: a single-center cross-sectional study,
medRxiv. (2020), https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.26.20027938.
[75] H. Qing, Z. Li, Z. Yang, M. Shi, Z. Huang, J. Song, et al., The possibility of COVID19 transmission from eye to nose, Acta Ophthalmol. (Copenh) 98 (3) (2020) e388,
https://doi.org/10.1111/aos.14412.
[76] I. Seah, R. Agrawal, Can the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) affect the eyes?
A review of coronaviruses and ocular implications in humans and animals, Ocul.
Immunol. Inflamm. 28 (3) (2020) 391–395, https://doi.org/10.1080/
09273948.2020.1738501.
[77] F. Liu, X. Long, B. Zhang, W. Zhang, X. Chen, Z. Zhang, ACE2 expression in
pancreas may cause pancreatic damage after SARS-CoV-2 infection, Clin.
Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 18 (9) (2020), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cgh.2020.04.040, 2128-2130.e2.

15

