American Journal of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Medicine and Surgery 42 (2021) 102817

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

American Journal of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck
Medicine and Surgery
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/amjoto

Meniere’s disease: Medical management, rationale for vestibular
preservation and suggested protocol in medical failure
Laura H. Christopher a, *, Eric P. Wilkinson b, 1
a
b

Division of Neurotology, House Ear Clinic, United States of America
House Ear Clinic, House Institute Foundation, United States of America

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Meniere’s disease
Intratympanic steroid
Intratympanic gentamicin
Endolymphatic hydrops
Vestibular migraine
Treatment of Meniere’s disease
Endolymphatic sac shunt

Meniere’s disease is a peripheral audiovestibular disorder characterized by vertigo, hearing loss, tinnitus, and
aural fullness. Management of these symptoms includes medical and surgical treatment. Many patients with
Meniere’s disease can be managed using nonablative therapy, such as intratympanic steroids and endolymphatic
shunt surgery, prior to ablative techniques such as intratympanic gentamicin. Recognition of concurrent
migraine symptoms may aid in medical therapy and also underscore the importance of preserving vestibular
function where possible. The goal of this review is to explain the importance of nonablative therapy options and
discuss treatment protocols after medical failure.

Meniere’s disease is an idiopathic peripheral audiovestibular disor­
der characterized by episodic vertigo, unilateral fluctuating hearing loss,
tinnitus, and aural fullness. In 1861, Prosper Meniere noted that
symptoms of vertigo and hearing loss may be attributable to an inner ear
disorder [1]. Meniere’s disease (MD) affects approximately 50–200 per
100,000 adults [2]. An approximately 2:1 female gender predilection
exists, and onset of symptoms is typically during ages 40 through 60
years [3].
The American Academy of Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery
(AAO-HNS) has created strict diagnostic criteria to facilitate diagnosis
and management of MD. No definitive test for MD exists, therefore
criteria for diagnosis involve categories based on symptoms. Definite
MD, as defined by AAO-HNS includes two or more episodes of vertigo,
each lasting 20 min to 12 h, audiometrically confirmed low frequency
sensorineural hearing loss associated with vertigo, and fluctuating aural
symptoms in the affected ear [5]. Typical aural symptoms unilateral
tinnitus, subjective hearing loss, and aural fullness. The final criterion
for “definite MD” is to exclude other causes of these symptoms. It is
important to distinguish MD from other common causes of vertigo which
may also present with hearing loss, tinnitus, or aural fullness, such as
autoimmune inner ear disease, vestibular migraine, vestibular schwan­
noma, otosyphilis, vestibular neuritis, and acute labyrinthitis.
Meniere’s disease is a clinical diagnosis with significant variation in
presentation [6]. Patients tend to have attacks that are random and may

have periods of remission lasting months to years. Therefore, an accu­
rate diagnosis may take months, even in ideal circumstances with an
experienced neurotologist [6].
The pathophysiology of Meniere’s disease is not well understood,
and several theories have been proposed over the years to explain the
classic symptoms. The most long-standing and well accepted etiology is
endolymphatic hydrops (ELH), a term used to describe an increase in
endolymph within the membranous labyrinth resulting in episodic inner
ear symptoms. In Schuknecht’s rupture theory, the endolymph space
becomes distended and eventually ruptures Reissner’s membrane.
Cochlear hair cells and the audiovestibular nerve are then exposed to
toxic, potassium rich endolymph, responsible for episodic spinning
vertigo and changes in hearing [7,8]. Additional mechanisms suggested
to cause hydrops involve excess endolymph production, decreased
endolymph resorption, altered secretions of the endolymphatic sac, and
altered immune function of the endolymphatic sac [1].
Regardless of the mechanism, endolymphatic hydrops is the ultimate
result and has been pathologically confirmed [9]. The hallmark of
endolymphatic hydrops seems to be present in all patients with MD, but
not all patients with ELH have MD [10]. Histopathology records from
Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary show that many patients with ELH
have secondary hydrops, or hydrops associated with diseases other than
MD. These results suggest that “ELH may be necessary but not sufficient
for MD development” [5].

* Corresponding author at: House Ear Clinic, 2100 West Third Street, Los Angeles, CA 90057, United States of America.
E-mail addresses: lchristopher@houseclinic.com (L.H. Christopher), ewilkinson@houseclinic.com (E.P. Wilkinson).
1
House Ear Clinic, 2100 West Third Street, Los Angeles, CA 90057.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjoto.2020.102817
Received 24 August 2020;
Available online 2 November 2020
0196-0709/© 2020 Published by Elsevier Inc.

L.H. Christopher and E.P. Wilkinson

American Journal of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Medicine and Surgery 42 (2021) 102817

Although the clinical presentation of MD is variable, true “spinning”
vertigo is a necessary criterion for diagnosis [5]. Patients may use the
word “dizziness” to describe vertigo, lightheadedness, disequilibrium, or
balance problems in general. This is particularly relevant in elderly
patients, with multiple medical comorbidities. Determining whether the
patient is experiencing the false sense of self movement or movement of
his or her surroundings is critical to diagnosing MD [11].
The natural course of MD is variable and unpredictable. Typically,
MD presents with sudden attacks of vertigo, unilateral hearing loss,
tinnitus, and aural fullness [1]. Vertigo is often severe, with associated
nausea and vomiting, lasting for hours. Frequency of attacks may range
from 6 to 11 attacks per year [6]. These attacks may increase in number
for several years and then gradually decline over time. Periods of
remission may last months to years, with recurrences occurring even 20
years following diagnosis [12]. The usual course of MD is gradual
decline and eventual cessation of vertiginous attacks. Green et al. re­
ported absence of vertigo in 54% and decrease in vertigo in 30% of 108
patients with MD followed for 9 years [13].
Hearing loss in MD tends to mimic the course of vertigo, in that
hearing worsens over time with eventual “burn out”. Low frequency
sensorineural hearing loss is typical in the early disease stages, with
eventual high frequency SNHL over time. Hearing loss is usually uni­
lateral and fluctuating and progressively worsens to a flat loss of over 50
dB [14]. A 20-year longitudinal study reported moderate to severe
hearing loss in 82% of MD patients over time [14].
The differential diagnosis for patients presenting with vertigo in
addition to hearing loss, aural fullness, and tinnitus includes autoim­
mune ear disease, otosyphilis, perilymphatic fistula, vestibular
schwannoma, endolymphatic sac tumors, end stage otosclerosis, and
labyrinthitis. For many patients, response to treatment may be needed to
confirm the diagnosis. For these reasons, delay in diagnosis is common.
A Finnish study reported a diagnostic delay of greater than or equal to
five years in 20% of patients with MD [15].
The relationship between vestibular migraine (VM) and MD is
important to note, particularly relevant in patients that do not present
with hearing loss. There is significant overlap in the clinical features of
VM and MD, and these diseases may occur concurrently, with some
studies estimating a 35% rate of VM in MD patients [16]. Although the
precise pathophysiology involved between these entities is unknown,
some suggest that the inner ear pathology related to MD may trigger
migraines. This “neural triggering” may exacerbate migraine symptoms
in patients with concurrent MD and VM. The recently published AAOHNS Clinical Practice Guidelines highlight this overlap and recom­
mend that clinicians determine if patients meet diagnostic criteria for
vestibular migraine when assessing for Meniere’s disease.
Treatment of patients with concurrent VM and MD is complex, in
that avoidance of destructive or ablative therapy is important. There­
fore, effective long-term treatment using nondestructive therapy is ideal.
Endolymphatic sac surgery along with dietary and medical management
of migraine symptoms are the treatments of choice in these patients.
Migraine patients may also be more prone to cervicogenic dizziness, in
which neck movements or muscle tension may precipitate symptoms.
These symptoms are related to the vestibulocollic reflex, which causes
neck movement in response to head movement sensed by the vestibular
system via the medial vestibulospinal tract. The pathophysiology
involved is beyond the scope of this paper, but manual neck physical
therapy may be a useful additional treatment for these symptoms, if
present.
Medical management of vestibular migraine is complex and includes
abortive and preventative therapy. Treatment of acute symptoms in VM
includes antinausea medications and short-term vestibular suppressants.
In patients with concurrent MD and VM, treatment is most often focused
on managing chronic symptoms using preventative medications. Diet
modifications similar to those of MD have been recommended, including
limiting caffeine intake. Supplementation with B2, Magnesium glyci­
nate, and Coenzyme Q have shown some benefit in patients with

migraine [17]. The majority of medications for prevention of vestibular
migraine are those used for migraine headache and include the
following: beta blockers, topiramate, calcium channel blockers, tricyclic
antidepressants (amitriptyline, nortriptyline), selective serotonin reup­
take inhibitors, serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (ven­
lafaxine), and benzodiazepines [18]. In a 2015 prospective, randomized,
controlled clinical trial, venlafaxine and propranolol were both effective
in reducing vestibular symptoms for VM patients. Venlafaxine provided
additional anti-depressant benefits [19].
Botox is an additional option for VM patients. Botox and topiramate
are the current available chronic migraine treatments with more than
one high quality randomized controlled trial supporting their use [20].
Recent literature suggests that topiramate may be particularly beneficial
for patients with concurrent VM and MD. A recent retrospective review
from UC Irvine showed improvement in low frequency sensorineural
hearing loss in patients receiving adjuvant migraine medication, spe­
cifically nortriptyline and topiramate, in addition to oral and trans­
tympanic steroids, compared to those receiving only oral and
transtympanic steroids [21]. The hearing improvement seen with the
addition of topiramate may be explained by the medication’s ability to
lower intracranial pressure. In vivo studies using rats demonstrated a
significant reduction of intracranial pressure following both subcu­
taneous and oral administration of topiramate [22].
Calcitonin gene related peptide (CGRP) is a neuropeptide expressed
in trigeminal neurons and involved in pain perception. Much of the
current migraine literature is focusing on CGRP and its role in migraine.
CGRP receptor antagonists and anti-CGRP monoclonal antibodies have
emerged as new and effective treatment options for chronic migraine
[20]. Although its role in vestibular migraine is unclear, recent studies
suggest that targeting CGRP may change the paradigm for migraine
treatment.
Treatment of Meniere’s disease is complex and involves both medical
and surgical management and destructive and nondestructive options. A
wide variety of treatment options exist, partially due to the lack of un­
derstanding regarding the pathophysiology of MD and the multiple
proposed etiologies. Additionally, randomized controlled trials to study
treatment options are difficulty to carry out because of the fluctuating
nature of the disease and subjective symptoms. Therefore, anecdotal
evidence and opinion are used to guide management of MD.
The goals of treatment are to reduce the severity and frequency of
vertigo attacks, preserve hearing, alleviate aural fullness and tinnitus,
and improve quality of life. The episodic and unpredictable nature of the
disease complicates treatment, due to the difficulty of distinguishing
asymptomatic periods of the disease versus treatment benefit.
The purpose of this paper is to highlight the advantages of nonde­
structive treatment options such as medical management, intratympanic
dexamethasone, and endolymphatic shunt surgery prior to the ablative
measures including intratympanic gentamicin and labyrinthectomy.
Many patients improve using these less invasive measures and are able
to avoid potentially morbid treatment options and sacrifice of hearing.
Medical management includes treatment of acute attacks and pro­
phylaxis. Acute attacks are managed using central vestibular suppres­
sants [23]. These medications include first generation antihistamines,
benzodiazepines, and anticholinergics, which work through different
pathways to alleviate vertigo and nausea. Commonly used first gener­
ation antihistamines include meclizine, dimenhydrinate, and diphen­
hydramine. Promethazine is a commonly used phenothiazine with
antihistamine properties. Scopolamine is an anticholinergic that is
commonly prescribed in its transdermal form. The AAO-HNS recom­
mends the use of any of the above-mentioned vestibular suppressants,
citing similar efficacies [24,25]. Physician and patient preference tend
to guide which medication is prescribed. These medications are used
only for acute attacks, as chronic use may prevent vestibular
compensation.
Prophylactic treatment for MD focuses on lifestyle modifications and
management of potential triggers prior to medication use. Limiting salt,
2

L.H. Christopher and E.P. Wilkinson

American Journal of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Medicine and Surgery 42 (2021) 102817

caffeine, and alcohol is recommended, as these may be triggers for at­
tacks. Salt intake is thought to affect the endolymph fluid in the inner
ear, and the recommendations for a sodium-restriction diet are based on
the American Heart Association’s work [26]. Additional triggers include
stress and allergy. Studies have shown that stress hormones in the
endolymphatic sac are increased in MD patients, and stress reduction
techniques have shown to improve symptoms [27–29]. Stress reduction,
well balanced, regular meals, and allergy management are all recom­
mended for control of symptoms. Observational studies have shown
improvement in symptoms of vertigo and dizziness with salt and caffeine
restrictions [30]. Additionally, most patients are willing and able to try
these methods prior to medication or surgery [30]. Although there are
no randomized controlled trials to support their use, these dietary/
lifestyle modifications have been advocated for decades and improve
symptoms in many patients.
Oral pharmacotherapy is used for maintenance therapy in patients in
whom diet and lifestyle changes do not control symptoms. As stated
previously, the ultimate result of endolymphatic hydrops may be caused
by multiple etiologies, including viral infection, ion imbalance, diet,
autoimmune factors, vascular abnormalities, and allergy [31–33]. Di­
uretics and betahistine, the most commonly recommended medications
for MD, target these etiologies. Through different mechanisms of ac­
tions, diuretics are thought to affect the electrolyte balance of the
endolymph in the inner ear and thereby reduce the amount of endo­
lymph. Thiazide diuretics, with or without a potassium sparing diuretic,
and the carbonic anhydrase inhibitor acetazolamide (Diamox) are the
most commonly prescribed diuretics for MD [23]. Studies have shown
improvement in vertigo symptoms with diuretic use [34].
Betahistine is an additional oral pharmacotherapy option used for
MD. It is a histamine analogue thought to cause increased vasodilation
to the inner ear. Since its exact mechanism of action is unclear, there is
no Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for its use in MD.
However, this drug has been used worldwide for peripheral vertigo
treatment for many years. Conflicting evidence exists regarding its effect
on vertigo in clinical trials. A 2016 Cochrane found that 60% of patients
had an improvement in vertigo after taking betahistine compared to
placebo [35]. However, a recent double-blind RCT (BEMED trial) did not
show a change in the number of vertigo attacks in MD patients compared
to placebo [36]. The MD Clinical Practice Guidelines recommend
betahistine as an “option” for maintenance therapy to reduce symptoms
or prevent attacks [5].
At the House Ear Clinic, betahistine has been offered to MD patients
for around 10 years with good results. Betahistine is not approved by the
FDA in the United States. As such, it can be difficult to obtain for patient
use. The reader is referred to the discussion on Dr. Timothy Hain’s web
page regarding legal issues and availability of this drug: http://www.
dizziness-and-balance.com/treatment/drug/SERC%20sources.htm and
http://www.dizziness-and-balance.com/treatment/drug/serc.html.
Compounding pharmacies may be able to supply betahistine in certain
situations. Physicians seeking to counsel their patients on the use of
Betahistine should refer to local and federal laws regarding supplements
and medications that are not FDA approved and also have informed
consent discussions with their patients regarding the advantages and
disadvantages of using non-FDA approved therapies.
For many, diet and lifestyle modifications in addition to betahistine
offer long term control of symptoms. Side effects are minor and include
headache, nausea, and upper gastrointestinal symptoms [35]. At the
House Ear Clinic, we have found that most patients tolerate this medi­
cation quite well with symptom relief.
Additional prophylactic treatments include allergy treatment, im­
munosuppressants, migraine treatment, antivirals, oral steroids, and low
dose benzodiazepines. Significant crossover exists between allergy,
migraine, and MD. Some suggest that allergy may, in fact, be the link
between MD and migraine [37]. Limited data exists regarding the effi­
cacy of oral steroids and MD, but some studies show improvement in
vertigo symptoms [38]. At the House Ear Clinic, prednisone tapers are

used frequently for symptoms of increased vertigo or significant changes
in hearing. Most patients tolerate this medication well and show
improvement in vertigo and hearing. Additionally, low dose benzodi­
azepines have been used at our institution for symptom control. The low
dose prescribed tends to minimize the side effects such as sedation and
provides relief from vertigo.
In summary, there are many oral pharmacotherapy options available
for MD patients to control symptoms. Of note, trial of the abovementioned medication options for several months may be necessary to
show effect. Strict adherence to a low salt, low caffeine diet in addition
to the prescribed medication is needed in order determine whether pa­
tients will benefit. At the House Ear Clinic, many patients are able to find
a regimen that controls symptoms.
For some patients, however, attacks of vertigo are not controlled
with these medications used as maintenance therapy. In patients
without symptom control using noninvasive techniques who have
serviceable hearing, the next step is intratympanic dexamethasone. The
mechanism of action is thought to involve anti-inflammatory effects and
ion homeostasis [39]. The AAO-HNS clinical practice guidelines for MD
offer intratympanic (IT) steroid therapy as an “option” for patients with
active MD not responsive to noninvasive techniques. Randomized con­
trol trials and systematic reviews have shown improvement in vertigo,
tinnitus, hearing, and aural fullness with intratympanic steroids [40,41].
Other studies have shown lack of statistically significant changes in
vertigo rates [42].
The AAO-HNS Clinical Practice Guidelines note that IT steroid
therapy provides less control of vertigo than intratympanic gentamicin
(43–90% of patients versus 70–87% of patients, respectively) [43–46].
The guidelines go on to state that “IT gentamicin therapy may provide
superior vertigo control in patients with severe or recurrent vertigo or
advanced MD.” This is intuitive, as gentamicin is vestibulotoxic, and IT
gentamicin may be considered a chemical labyrinthectomy. IT genta­
micin and other ablative techniques such as labyrinthectomies do offer a
higher likelihood of vertigo control. However, this comes at a cost: the
sacrifice of hearing. In patients without serviceable hearing, the decision
to proceed with IT gentamicin prior to IT steroids may be appropriate.
The low dose transtympanic gentamicin protocol developed by the Mayo
Clinic recommends injecting approximately 0.75 mL of a 40 mg/mL
gentamicin solution into the middle ear [47].This dose may be repeated
at one month for continued symptoms and may be diluted to 20 mg/mL
in patients older than 65 years. Reported incidences of sensorineural
hearing loss following transtympanic gentamicin injections vary. Using
their low dose protocol, the Mayo Clinic results show no major changes
in hearing [47]. A meta-analysis comparing techniques of intratympanic
gentamicin administration reported an overall hearing loss rate of 25%
[48]. Higher rates of hearing loss were seen with multiple daily dosing
regimens.
In the large subset of patients with good or serviceable hearing,
destructive therapies should be avoided until all nondestructive thera­
pies have been exhausted. Therefore, it is our practice to advocate for
nonablative techniques prior to ablative or destructive techniques.
Emphasis is also placed on ruling out concurrent vestibular migraine.
Specifically, patients should be managed with oral pharmacotherapy, IT
steroids, or endolymphatic shunt surgery prior to destructive techniques
such as IT gentamicin.
The risks associated with IT steroids are minimal and avoid the
systemic side effects of oral steroids. Tympanic membrane perforation is
cited as a risk factor, with some studies reporting a nearly 40% risk of
perforation [49]. In our experience, permanent tympanic membrane
perforation following IT therapy is rare. Cost, time for treatment, and
patient discomfort have been cited as additional “risks”. We have found
that patients tolerate the procedure well. IT steroid treatment is most
commonly offered for patients with active Meniere’s disease and has a
relatively quick onset of action. This is particularly desirable for patients
whose quality of life is poor due to vertigo and additional inner ear
symptoms. The additional time and cost are far outweighed by the
3

L.H. Christopher and E.P. Wilkinson

American Journal of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Medicine and Surgery 42 (2021) 102817

improvement in symptoms, hearing preservation, and lack of systemic
side effects.
IT steroids may be administered multiple times, depending on pa­
tient symptoms. For some, maintenance therapy using oral medications
with intermittent IT steroid injections for flareups provides lifelong
control of symptoms. In patients without a good response to IT steroid
injections or those desiring a more long-term solution for vertigo con­
trol, endolymphatic sac surgery is recommended.
Endolymphatic sac (ELS) surgery has been a controversial subject in
neurotology for many years, with conflicting evidence in the literature
regarding its efficacy. Since its initial description in 1927 by Portmann,
four types of surgical techniques have evolved: endolymphatic sac
incision, endolymphatic-subarachnoid shunt, endolymphatic-mastoid
shunt, and endolymphatic sac decompression [50]. William House is
recognized for his description of the endolymphatic subarachnoid shunt.
However, the House Clinic now consistently performs the
endolymphatic-mastoid shunt using silastic sheeting, with a reduced risk
for intracranial complications and hearing decline.
The Danish Sham Study, published by Thomsen et al. in 1981,
sparked controversy regarding the efficacy of ELS surgery, reporting no
difference in vertigo control when comparing ELS surgery to “placebo”
mastoidectomy [51]. Critics, including Pillsbury, Welling, and Nagaraja,
reviewed the data and reported statistically significant improvement in
vertigo with ELST surgery [2,52]. A review of the current literature
supports that 80–90% of MD patients have vertigo control for 2 years
after surgery, decreasing to approximately 60% at 5 years [53–55].
Hearing is preserved, with a less than 2% incidence of total SNHL, based
on the recent AAO-HNS Clinical Practice Guidelines [5].
In response to the controversy surrounding the efficacy of ELS sur­
gery and the recent emphasis in the medical community regarding cost
effective treatment options, Pensak et al. reported a five-year control
rate for vertigo of 68–92% in patients undergoing ELS surgery [56]. A
follow up study in 2008 demonstrated a 78% control rate of vertigo
using ELS surgery, emphasizing the surgery’s long-term efficacy using
evidence-based results in contrast to transtympanic steroids’ unknown
long-term results [57]. Convert et al. studied long term quality of life
results after undergoing endolymphatic sac decompression for MD.
Using a 40 item MD Outcome Questionnaire, the authors reported a 71%
control rate for vertigo at 2 years following surgery. Additionally,
hearing was improved or stable at three months after surgery [58].
Despite these results, the recently released AAO-HNS Clinical Prac­
tice Guidelines do not make a recommendation for or against ELS sur­
gery for MD. At the House Ear Clinic, ELS surgery is routinely offered to
patients with good hearing and uncontrolled symptoms despite maximal
medical management. This procedure offers an additional long-term
treatment option prior to destructive management. The surgery is a
low risk procedure, and elderly patients tolerate the procedure well
[59]. We have found that most patients opt for ELS surgery prior to
undergoing any kind of destructive treatment, highlighting the value
placed on hearing preservation by patients. Revision ELS surgery may
also be provided, with significant improvement in vertigo control in
76–95% of patients [60,61]. ELS surgery is particularly important in
patients with bilateral disease at risk of bilateral hearing loss.
Attempting to treat unilateral MD without ablative therapy may avoid
the complex treatment situation of an only hearing ear in the future. The
literature suggests that ELS surgery may limit the need for destructive
treatment to approximately 2% in some estimates [2].
Delayed endolymphatic hydrops is defined by new onset of MD
symptoms following a previous unilateral severe hearing loss and is a
form of bilateral Meniere’s disease [1]. A longitudinal follow up study of
Meniere’s patients estimated up to a 45% incidence of bilateral MD [13].
Results showed that a larger percentage of patients with bilateral MD
continued to require medical treatment at 14 year follow up, compared
to patients with unilateral MD [13]. A 2006 retrospective review at our
institution found a 25% prevalence of bilateral involvement [62].
Contralateral ear involvement may occur up to decades after unilateral

MD, therefore, long term follow up for MD patients is imperative [62].
Bilateral vestibular loss may occur in patients with bilateral MD. The
bilateral vestibular loss in these patients may be present with symptoms
of imbalance, as opposed to spinning vertigo [62]. Additionally, these
patients may have difficulty with oscillopsia, further complicating their
imbalance. In summary, the decision to proceed with ablative therapy
for unilateral disease is made complicated by the risk of developing
contralateral disease.
Patients may not have immediate results after ELS surgery, however,
at our institution we recommend waiting two to three months before
proceeding with any additional changes to therapy or ablative therapy.
This allows time to assess the efficacy of the ELS surgery. During this
time, intratympanic steroids may be used for additional symptom con­
trol. The addition of IT steroids as a “boost” therapy postoperatively is
not uncommon [54]. Some surgeons may recommend cessation of
medical therapy (i.e. diuretics and betahistine) post operatively. We
recommend that patients continue all medications for several months
following ELS surgery, with a gradual tapering as symptoms improve.
Again, this allows the ELS surgery time to prove effective.
Vestibular nerve section (VNS) is considered a hearing preservation
technique but is a vestibular ablative technique in that the vestibular
input is destroyed. Patients with contralateral disease are not candidates
for this procedure. Videonystagmography must be performed in the
contralateral ear preoperatively to avoid creating bilateral vestibular
loss, resulting in oscillopsia. Studies have reported vertigo control rates
from >90% after vestibular nerve section [63–65]. Some surgeons favor
VNS over ELS surgery. However, VNS carries a higher risk of SNHL as the
cochlear nerve fibers are sometimes difficult to dissect from the
vestibular nerve. The surgery is more invasive than ELS surgery and adds
the risks of a craniotomy. Finally, complete vertigo control may not be
attained if residual nerve fibers are left intact [66].
Vestibular nerve sectioning was first described in the early 1900s
using a suboccipital approach [67]. Since that time, additional ap­
proaches to VNS have been described, including retrolabyrinthine,
middle fossa, and combined retrolabyrinthine/retrosigmoid approaches.
The retrolabyrinthine approach was first described in 1978 by Drs.
Brackmann and Hitselberger and is the preferred approach at the House
Clinic today. Benefits of the retrolabyrinthine approach include hearing
preservation, reduced cerebellar retraction, direct view of the vestibu­
locochlear and facial nerves, and consistent outcomes for symptom relief
[67]. One indication for proceeding directly to VNS rather than medical
management or ELS surgery is drop attacks. Due to the potentially
morbid risks associated with drop attacks, ablative techniques may be
indicated [68].
While the goal of this paper is to emphasize attempting nonde­
structive therapy in MD, ablative techniques certainly play a role in
management. Patients with uncontrolled vertigo despite medical man­
agement, IT steroids, and ELS shunt are candidates for ablative therapy
(Fig. 1). Destructive therapy options include IT gentamicin and laby­
rinthectomy. Patients with nonserviceable hearing may be offered these
options early during management, as these options provide good control
of symptoms. Prior to initiation of IT gentamicin, particularly in patients
with class A or B hearing, patients should be tested for a specific mito­
chondrial mutation which is well known to cause aminoglycoside
sensitivity, resulting in rapid onset severe to profound hearing loss, even
with small doses [69]. Saint Francis Health System offers testing for this
genotype, MT-RNR1, and the resulting mutation, m.1555A > G, using a
simple blood test (St. Francis Laboratory, St. Louis, MO). This testing is
particularly important in patients who have any serviceable hearing
[69].
Elderly patients with MD are unique in that they may have delayed
or failed vestibular compensation following ablative therapies [70,71].
Surgical procedures for ablative therapy and also nonablative therapies,
such as ELS surgery, may not be possible due to medical comorbidities.
In these cases, intratympanic gentamicin is the procedure of choice.
Dilution of gentamicin or titrating the dosage may be useful in the
4

L.H. Christopher and E.P. Wilkinson

American Journal of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Medicine and Surgery 42 (2021) 102817

Fig. 1. Meniere’s disease treatment algorithm.

elderly. Additionally, vestibular rehabilitation therapy in older patients
may improve their recovery following ablative techniques [71].
In conclusion, MD patients should be offered nondestructive thera­
pies before proceeding with IT gentamicin or other destructive tech­
niques. Many patients are able to be managed using migraine treatment,
MD oral pharmacotherapy, IT dexamethasone, or ELS surgery. Surgical
treatment of MD is necessary only in the minority of patients. ELS sur­
gery is a good nonablative option and is routinely offered to patients at
our institution prior to vestibular nerve section. The value of these
treatment options should be emphasized in MD treatment algorithms.

[11] Bisdorff A, Von Brevern M, Lempert T, Newman-Toker DE. Classification of
vestibular symptoms: towards an international classification of vestibular
disorders. J Vestib Res 2009;19:1–2–13.
[12] Havia M, Kentala E, Pyykko I. Prevalence of Meniere’s disease in general
population of southern Finland. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2005;133(5):762–8.
[13] Green Jr JD, Blum DJ, Harner SG. Longitudinal followup of patients with Menière’s
disease. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1991;104(6):783–8.
[14] Friberg U, Stahle J, Svedberg A. The natural course of Me’nie’re’s disease. Acta
Otolaryngol Suppl 1984;406:72–7.
[15] Pyykko I, Nakashima T, Yoshida T, Zou J, Naganawa S. Me’nie’re’s disease: a
reappraisal supported by a variable latency of symptoms and the MRI visualisation
of endolymphatic hydrops. BMJ Open 2013;3(2).
[16] Shin CH, Kim Y, Yoo MH, et al. Management of Me’nie’re’s disease: how does the
coexistence of vestibular migraine affect outcomes? Otol Neurotol 2019;40(5):
666–73.
[17] Gaul C, Diener HC, Danesch U. Migravent® Study Group. Improvement of migraine
symptoms with a proprietary supplement containing riboflavin, magnesium and
Q10: a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, multicenter trial.
J Headache Pain 2015;16:516.
[18] Bisdorff AR. Management of vestibular migraine. Ther Adv Neurol Disord 2011;4
(3):183–91.
[19] Salviz M, Yuce T, Acar H, Karatas A, Acikalin RM. Propranolol and venlafaxine for
vestibular migraine prophylaxis: a randomized controlled trial. Laryngoscope
2016;126(1):169–74.
[20] Agostoni EC, Barbanti P, Calabresi P, et al. Current and emerging evidence-based
treatment options in chronic migraine: a narrative review. J Headache Pain 2019;
20(1):92 [Published 2019 Aug 30].
[21] Abouzari M, Goshtasbi K, Chua JT, et al. Adjuvant migraine medications in the
treatment of sudden sensorineural hearing loss [published online ahead of print,
2020 Apr 3]. Laryngoscope 2020. https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.28618 [doi:
10.1002/lary.28618].
[22] Scotton WJ, Botfield HF, Westgate CS, et al. Topiramate is more effective than
acetazolamide at lowering intracranial pressure. Cephalalgia 2019;39(2):209–18.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0333102418776455.
[23] Slattery 3rd WH, Fayad JN. Medical treatment of Meniere’s disease. Otolaryngol
Clin North Am 1997;30(6):1027–37.
[24] Clissold SP, Heel RC. Transdermal hyoscine (scopolamine): a preliminary review of
its pharmacodynamic properties and therapeutic efficacy. Drugs 1985;29(3):
189–207.
[25] Hahn A, Sejna I, Stefflova B, Schwarz M, Baumann W. A fixed combination of
cinnarizine/dimenhydrinate for the treatment of patients with acute vertigo due to
vestibular disorders: a randomized, reference-controlled clinical study. Clin Drug
Investig 2008;28(2):89–99.
[26] Cogswell ME, Zhang Z, Carriquiry AL, et al. Sodium and potassium intakes among
US adults: NHANES 2003–2008. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;96(3):647–57.
[27] Kitahara T, Doi K, Maekawa C, et al. Meniere’s attacks. Occur in the inner ear with
excessive vasopressin type-2 receptors. J Neuroendocrinol 2008;20(12):1295–300.

Declaration of competing interest
None.
No disclosures.
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
References
[1] Antonio SM, Friedman R. Meniere’s disease. In: Jackler RK, Brackmann DE, editors.
Neurotology. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2005. p. 621–38.
[2] Packer MD, Welling DB. Surgery of the endolymphatic sac. In: Brackmann DE,
Shelton C, Arriaga MA, editors. Otologic surgery. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.
p. 362–76.
[3] Harris JP, Alexander TH. Current-day prevalence of Meniere’s syndrome. Audiol
Neurootol 2010;15(5):318–22.
[5] Basura GJ, Adams ME, Monfared A, et al. Clinical practice guideline: Ménière’s
disease. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2020;162(2_suppl):S1–55.
[6] Watanabe Y, Mizukoshi K, Shojaku H, Watanabe I, Hinoki M, Kitahara M.
Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of Meniere’s disease in Japan. Acta
Otlaryngol Suppl 1995;519:06–210.
[7] Schuknecht HF, Gulya AJ. Endolymphatic hydrops: an overview and classification.
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol Suppl 1983;106:1–20.
[8] Oberman BS, Patel VA, Cureoglu S, Isildak H. The aetiopathologies of Meniere’s
disease: a contemporary review. Acta Otorhinolaryngol Ital 2017;4:250–63.
[9] Paparella MM, Djalilian HR. Etiology, pathophysiology of symptoms, and
pathogenesis of Me’nie’re’s disease. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2002;35(3):
529–45.
[10] Merchant SN, Adams JC, Nadol Jr JB. Pathophysiology of Meniere’s syndrome:
are symptoms caused by endolymphatic hydrops? Otol Neurotol 2005;26(1):
74–81.

5

L.H. Christopher and E.P. Wilkinson

American Journal of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Medicine and Surgery 42 (2021) 102817

[28] Maekawa C, Kitahara T, Kizawa K, et al. Expression and translocation of aquaporin2 in the endolymphatic sac in patients with Me’nie’re’s disease. J Neuroendocrinol
2010;22(11):1157–64.
[29] Yardley L, Kirby S. Evaluation of booklet-based self management of symptoms in
Me’nie’re disease: a randomized controlled trial. Psychosom Med 2006;68(5):
762–9.
[30] Luxford E, Berliner KI, Lee J, Luxford WM. Dietary modification as adjunct
treatment in Me’nie’re’s disease: patient willingness and ability to comply. Otol
Neurotol 2013;34(8):1438–43.
[31] Derebery MJ. The role of allergy in Meniere’s disease. Otolaryngol Clin North Am
1997;30(6):1007–16.
[32] Vrabec JT. Herpes simplex virus and Me’nie’re’s disease. Laryngoscope 2003;113
(9):1431–8.
[33] Derebery MJ, Rao VS, Siglock TJ, Linthicum FH, Nelson RA. Me’nie’re’s disease: an
immune complex-mediated illness? Laryngoscope 1991;101(3):225–9.
[34] Torok N. Old and new in Me’nie’re disease. Laryngoscope 1977;87(11):1870–7.
[35] Murdin L, Hussain K, Schilder AGM. Betahistine for symptoms of vertigo. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2016;6:CD010696.
[36] Adrion C, Fischer CS, Wagner J, Gurkov R, Mansmann U, Strupp M. Efficacy and
safety of betahistine treatment in patients with Me’nie’re’s disease: primary results
of a long term, multicentre, double blind, randomised, placebo controlled, dose
defining trial (BEMED trial). BMJ 2016;352:h6816.
[37] Sen P, Georgalas C, Papesch M. Co-morbidity of migraine and Me’nie’re’s
disease—is allergy the link? J Laryngol Otol 2005;119(6):455–60.
[38] Morales-Luckie E, Cornejo-Suarez A, Zaragoza-Contreras MA, Gonzalez-Perez O.
Oral administration of prednisone to control refractory vertigo in Me’nie’re’s
disease: a pilot study. Otol Neurotol 2005;26(5):1022–6.
[39] Shirwany NA, Seidman MD, Tang W. Effect of transtympanic injection of steroids
on cochlear blood flow, auditory sensitivity, and histology in the guinea pig. Am J
Otol 1998;19(2):230–5.
[40] Phillips JS, Westerberg B. Intratympanic steroids for Me’nie’re’s disease or
syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011;7:CD008514.
[41] Garduno-Anaya MA, Couthino De Toledo H, Hinojosa-Gonzalez R, Pane-Pianese C,
Rios-Castaneda LC. Dexamethasone inner ear perfusion by intratympanic injection
in unilateral Me’nie’re’s disease: a two-year prospective, placebo controlled,
double-blind, randomized trial. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2005;133(2):285–94.
[42] Lambert PR, Carey J, Mikulec AA, LeBel C. Intratympanic sustained-exposure
dexamethasone thermosensitive gel for symptoms of Me’nie’re’s disease:
randomized phase 2b safety and efficacy trial. Otol Neurotol 2016;37(10):
1669–76.
[43] Casani AP, Piaggi P, Cerchiai N, Seccia V, Franceschini SS, Dallan I. Intratympanic
treatment of intractable unilateral Meniere disease: gentamicin or dexamethasone?
A randomized controlled trial. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2012;146(3):430–7.
[44] ElBeltagy Y, Shafik A, Mahmoud A, Hazaa N. Intratympanic injection in
Me’nie’re’s disease; symptomatic and audiovestibular; comparative, prospective
randomized 1-year control study. Egypt J Otolaryngol 2012;28(3):171–83.
[45] Patel M, Agarwal K, Arshad Q, et al. Intratympanic methylprednisolone versus
gentamicin in patients with unilateral Me’nie’re’s disease: a randomised, doubleblind, comparative effectiveness trial. Lancet 2016;388(10061):2753–62.
[46] Sarafraz M, Saki N, Nikakhlagh S, Mashali L, Arad A. Comparison the efficacy of
intratympanic injections of methylprednisolone and gentamicin to control vertigo
in unilateral Me’nie’re’s disease. Biomed Pharmacol J 2015;8:705–9.
[47] Harner SG, Kasperbauer JL, Facer GW, Beatty CW. Transtymp.
[48] Chia SH, Gamst AC, Anderson JP, Harris JP. Intratympanic gentamicin therapy for
Ménière’s disease: a meta-analysis. Otol Neurotol 2004;25(4):544–52. https://doi.
org/10.1097/00129492-200407000-00023.
[49] Lambert PR, Nguyen S, Maxwell KS, et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled clinical study to assess safety and clinical activity of OTO-104 given as a

[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
[55]
[56]
[57]
[58]

[59]
[60]
[61]
[62]
[63]
[64]
[65]
[66]
[67]
[68]
[69]
[70]
[71]

6

single intratympanic injection in patients with unilateral Me’nie’re’s disease. Otol
Neurotol 2012;33(7):1257–65.
Portmann G. The saccus endolymphaticus and an operation for draining for the
relief of vertigo. Proc R Soc Med 1927;20(12):1862–7.
Thomsen J, Bretlau P, Tos M, Johnsen NJ. Placebo effect in surgery for Ménière’s
disease. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study on endolymphatic sac shunt
surgery. Arch Otolaryngol 1981;107(5):271–7.
Welling DB, Nagaraja HN. Endolymphatic mastoid shunt: a reevaluation of
efficacy. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2000;122(3):340–5.
Brackmann DE, Nissen RL. Meniere’s disease: results of treatment with the
endolymphatic subarachnoid shunt compared with the endolymphatic mastoid
shunt. Am J Otol 1987;8(4):275–82.
Brinson GM, Chen DA, Arriaga MA. Endolymphatic mastoid shunt versus
endolymphatic sac decompression for Meniere’s disease. Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg 2007;136(3):415–21.
Telischi FF, Luxford WM. Long-term efficacy of endolymphatic sac surgery for
vertigo in Me’nie’re’s disease. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1993;109(1):83–7.
Pensak ML, Friedman RA. The role of endolymphatic mastoid shunt surgery in the
managed care era. Am J Otol 1998;19(3):337–40.
Lee L, Pensak ML. Contemporary role of endolymphatic mastoid shunt surgery in
the era of transtympanic perfusion strategies. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 2008;117
(12):871–5. https://doi.org/10.1177/000348940811701201.
Convert C, Franco-Vidal V, Bebear JP, Darrouzet V. Outcome-based assessment of
endolymphatic sac decompression for Ménière’s disease using the Ménière’s
disease outcome questionnaire: a review of 90 patients. Otol Neurotol 2006;27(5):
687–96.
Paparella MM, Fina M. Endolymphatic sac enhancement: reversal of pathogenesis.
Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2002;35(3):621–37.
Paparella MM. Revision of endolymphatic sac surgery for recurrent Meniere’s
disease. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 2002;35(3):607–19.
Schwager K, Baier G, El-Din N, Shehata-Dieler W, Carducci F, Helms J. Revision
surgery after saccotomy for Meniere’s disease: does it make sense? Eur Arch
Otorhinolaryngol 2002;259(5):239–42.
House JW, Doherty JK, Fisher LM, Derebery MJ, Berliner KI. Meniere’s disease:
prevalence of contralateral ear involvement. Otol Neurotol 2006;27(3):355–61.
Glasscock 3rd ME, Thedinger BA, Cueva RA, Jackson CG. An analysis of the
retrolabyrinthine vs. the retrosigmoid vestibular nerve section. Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg 1991;104(1):88–95.
Ortiz Armenta A. Retrolabyrinthine vestibular neurectomy. 10 years’ experience.
Rev Laryngol Otol Rhinol (Bord) 1992;113(5):413–7.
Silverstein H, Norrell H, Rosenberg S. The resurrection of vestibular neurectomy: a
10-year experience with 115 cases. J Neurosurg 1990;72(4):533–9.
Alarcon AV, Hidalgo LO, Arevalo RJ, Diaz MP. Labyrinthectomy and vestibular
neurectomy for intractable vertiginous symptoms. Int Arch Otorhinolaryngol 2017;
21(2):184–90.
Barnard ZR, Lekovic GP, Wilkinson EP, Peng KA. Vestibular nerve section via
retrolabyrinthine craniotomy. Oper Tech Otolayngol Head Neck Surg 2019;30(3):
212–6.
Nevoux J, Barbara M, Dornhoffer J, Gibson W, Kitahara T, Darrouzet V.
International consensus (ICON) on treatment of Me’nie’re’s disease. Eur Ann
Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Dis 2018;135(1s):S29–s32.
Dean L. Gentamicin therapy and MT-RNR1 genotype. In: Pratt VM, McLeod HL,
Rubinstein WS, et al., editors. Medical genetics summaries. Bethesda (MD):
National Center for Biotechnology Information (US); 2012.
Blakley BW. Update on intratympanic gentamicin for Meniere’s disease.
Laryngoscope 2000;110(2 Pt 1):236–40.
Rosenberg SI. Vestibular surgery for Ménière’s disease in the elderly: a review of
techniques and indications. Ear Nose Throat J 1999;78(6):443–6.

